
To sit down with a book, gentle reader, seems less and less what 
life is like. To be alone with your thoughts was perhaps never the 
usual human condition. Whether in a traditional tribal society or 
amid  today's  tastes  for  perpetual  messaging,  some  people  don't 
share so much as generate their thoughts, even their deepest feelings,  through  constant  social  connectivity.  Solitary  reflection 
may have always been the exception, a chosen path for a few, or 
for a few chosen hours in a busy life; introspection remains a difficult art. Fortunately, to sit with a book is to enter a dialogue in 
any case: unlike feeding among so many short, separate messages 
at once, it is to take up a longer transaction between reader and 
writer. It is also enjoyable: books exist not only for greater depth 
or nuance, but also for the sake of language itself.

Here the transaction is this: like a highway resurfacing project,  Ambient  Commons  asks  your  patience  with  a  temporary 
inconvenience  for  the  sake  of  permanent  improvement.  The 
project seems justifiable enough: whether you call it "overload"
or "superabundance," the flood of mediated information defines 
this era. This book adds a tiny (albeit dense) drop to that flood. 
For, as the philosophers explain, often the solution to too much 
information is still more information, not only for tagging and 
filtering, but also for making sense.

So  with  hope  for  improvements  in  how  you  cope  with 
superabundance, Ambient Commons invites you to rethink attention itself, especially with respect to your surroundings. You may 
sometime want to look past preoccupation with devices such as 
smartphones,  and  to  notice  more  situated,  often  inescapable 
forms of information, but this isn't just about stopping to smell 
the roses. At the very least, this book may help you justify greater 
attention to your surroundings as something better than nostalgia. There is a practical new sensibility here. It belongs to a cognitive revolution. So the next time you mumble, "Be here now!" 
at someone texting while walking in your way, this book could 
help you mean more by that.

You  might  also  understand  that  anyone,  in  any  era,  may 
have  felt  overload.  That  seems  safe  to  assume.  The  world  has 
always been overwhelming, all the more so whenever such basic 
needs as food or safety haven't been met. If you believe the old 
truism that you can keep only seven things in mind at once, then 
perhaps  people  began  sensing  overload  as  soon  as  there  were 
eight.

Yet today surely something has changed. Much more in the 
sensory  field  comes  from  and  refers  to  someplace  else.  Much 
more has been engineered deliberately for the workings of attention. The seductions of personalized media seem quite the opposite of a numbing, monotonous din. They don't lead to overload 
so much as to overconsumption. They aren't confined to specific sites  like  the  workplace  or  the  literary  salon  (where  ladies  and 
gentlemen of centuries past complained of overload--from the 
pressure  to  memorize  too  much  poetry).  Perhaps  the  biggest 
change is their ubiquity: as you may have noticed, the world is 
filling with ever more kinds of media, in ever more contexts and 
formats.  Screens  large  and  small appear  just  about  everywhere; 
physical  locations  are  increasingly  tagged  and  digitally  augmented;  sensors,  processors,  and  memory  are  not  just  carried 
about in pockets and bags, but also built into objects in everyday 
life. All these augmentations increasingly connect. This isn't the 
clanking industrial city that led sociologists to emphasize distraction,  nor  the  media  monoculture  that  led  them  to  situationist 
critiques  of  spectacle,  nor  the  all-seeing  Orwellian  state  that 
many assume to be the inevitable outcome of unchecked mediation. Today's embodiments of information have become something  far,  far  more  chaotic,  often  quite  culturally  fertile,  with 
ever  subtler  cognitive  appeal.  The  twenty-first-century  arts  are 
the arts of interface. But interface is no longer just about sitting 
at a machine. To describe how this new technology, these new 
surroundings, and this new outlook for attention have begun to 
interrelate, this book adopts a single name, "the ambient."

When  it  comes  to  making  sense  of  what  just  happened,  a 
book  still  works  best,  at  least  across  any  time  longer  than  a 
moment ago. (There is Twitter for that.) Although slow to produce, a book may still be the best way to trace an enduring path 
through  the  ideas  of  a  recent  decade  or  even  a  recent  century. 
Here in the twilight of print, it helps to remember that. Although 
a  book can't interconnect ideas nearly  so  readily as  the web, it 
can penetrate some of them better. As a longer form in a consistent  voice,  a  book  may  improve  individual  access  to  a  field  of ideas from many sources. I wrote this one to find out, and not 
from  a  position  of  expertise  so  much  as  one  where  I  could  do 
some digging. I wrote to help others find out for themselves, and 
for people in different disciplines to find out about one another. 
Please don't read  this to  learn something  new about your own 
field. Read it instead as one writer's inquiry. The word inquiry 
should keep coming up. To write is to learn. To write well is to 
bring  others  along,  even  through  superabundance.  Know  that, 
in the quickly rising flood of data, something just happened for 
attention to surroundings.
Let me begin by stating how much Ambient Commons reflects my good fortune to work at the University of Michigan, one of the world's foremost research universities. I especially value its combinations  of  expertise  in  tangible  interface,  cognition  and  environment, social history of technology, and networked urbanism. 
In all these areas, I am an amateur interloper. My university not only tolerates but often distinctly values my being so. In particular, esteemed colleagues Michael Cohen, Caroline Constant, Paul Edwards, Robert Fishman, Margaret Hedstrom, and John Marshall  have  generously  shown  me  the  way.  Taubman  College, 
where I teach architecture, has consistently provided encouragement for this, a project quite far from its core mission.

My work on this book would never have begun without the remarkable exposure  provided by so many travels,  especially in the boom years 2005-08, in many ways the dawn of embodied information.  My  thanks  go  to  more  individuals  and  organizations  than  I  can  name  here.  For  one,  I  thank  the  interaction design organization IxDA for its events and many of its thought leaders for reading the earliest outlines of this book. With apologies  for  omissions,  I  thank  Robert  Fabricant,  Sanjay  Kanna, Michiel de Lange, Dave Malouf, Greg Petroff, Robert Reimann, Michelle  Tepper,  and  John  Thackara  for  volunteering  to  read and comment on foggy 20-page outlines in 2008-09.

Work on what would become  Ambient Commons began in earnest  when  I  took  a  long-delayed  sabbatical  from  Taubman College  in  January  2010  to  be  a  guest  of  Berkeley  Center  for New Media, an interdisciplinary center at the University of California. Director  and kindred  spirit Ken  Goldberg kindly  made this happen just as all purses and doors were snapping shut after 
the  economic  crash.  Lifelong  friends  Edward  Lee  and  Rhonda 
Righter came up with the idea for this visit in the first place, and 
did much to ease my time on the ground there as well. Destiny 
Kinal  rented  me  her  writer's  hideout  with  shelves  full  of  great 
books and a fine view of the Golden Gate, and off I went. When, 
by  summer,  I  had  a  real  manuscript  under  way,  generous  colleagues  and  former  students  took  time  to  read  and  comment. 
Again with apologies for omissions, my thanks to Zack Denfeld, 
Steve  Harrison,  Danny  Herwitz,  Jessica  Hullman,  Erik  Hofer, 
Diana Khadr, and Noah Liebman for their insights.

Along the way, I had a great many conversations face-to-face 
and by email with a wide range of researchers; many of these are 
cited in the book's endnotes. Let me thank a few of those who 
were  especially  helpful:  cognitive  scientist  Marc  Berman,  overload  scholar  Finn  Brunton,  philosophy  educator  Brian  Bruya, 
journal editor Ulrik Ekman, urban informatics pioneer Marcus 
Foth,  urban  historian  David  Henkin,  journalist  (and  attention 
expert) Maggie Jackson, computer scientist and design educator 

  $   &   .   1   2   :   /   (   '   *   0   (   1   7   6      |      [ Y
Scott  Klemmer,  interaction  designer  John  Kolko,  linguist  and 
information  historian  Geoff  Nunberg,  sensate  city  researcher 
Dietmar Offenhuber, data formation master Casey Reas, ambient  media  entrepreneur  David  Rose,  design  research  strategist 
Paul  Siebert,  attention  teacher  Lynette  Smith,  and  software 
attention expert Linda Stone. My thanks as well to the ScienceTechnology-Society reading group in my university, and to the 
legendary  design  futurists  at  Steelcase  for  all  their  encouragements. I hope that none of you is too embarrassed by the result.

Thanks  to  the  MIT  Press  for  taking  this  unconventional 
project on. I must confess that, amid dealings with its own case of 
information superabundance, the Press knows how to let a text 
age, like wine, and that this proves wise in the end. Indeed it can 
be  just  what  goes  missing  among  others  who  hastily  publish 
online. Across these cycles, somehow it was January, two more of 
them, where being holed up in a Michigan winter gave me the 
nerve  to  remake  the  manuscript  in  response  to  advice.  Senior 
editor Doug Sery, who was definitely feeling overload, never lost 
sight  of  the  big  picture.  Of  the  many  experts  at  the  Press  who 
helped this project step by step along its way, Katie Helke Dokshina did so most consistently. Gone are the days when writers 
and editors can casually collaborate on the phone; the pace is now 
faster and software bloat has gotten in the way; but somehow the 
work still gets done, and very well. For a rigorous editorial reading of the proofs, I am much obliged to Caroline Constant, who 
had also helped very early in the project by providing short-term 
sabbatical digs in Boston. 

Many  artists  and  designers  contributed  images,  not  all  of 
which I could include; some did so as much as two or three years 
before the  project's completion.  (All  image  credits appear  with 

 [ Y L     |        $   &   .   1   2   :   /   (   '   *   0   (   1   7   6
the  figures.  All  photos  and  diagrams  without  any  source  indicated  are  my  own.)  For  their  outstanding  work  and  kindness, 
my  thanks  go  to  Jan  Edler  of  realities:united,  Eve  Mosher  of 
HighWaterLine, James Sturm of the Center for Cartoon Studies, and to everyone involved at the MIT Press for the freedom 
to make the art selections work as they should. Thanks in particular to Yasuyo Iguchi, ever the master, for the book's design 
and cover art.

Special thanks to Kit and Cal, who always know who they 
are,  each  so  much  smarter  than  I,  for  their  patience  with  my 
play-by-play descriptions of so many project stages. Even amid 
such  preoccupations  with  work,  they  will  always  have  my 
attention.

Last but not least, thanks in remembrance of Bill Mitchell, 
not only for his irreplaceable wit and wisdom, but also for blazing so many of the trails I have taken, and for keeping an early  
draft of my manuscript on his stack until the end, which came 
all too soon in June 2010.

"It's going to rain tonight."
"It's raining now," I said.
"The radio said tonight."

--Don DeLillo, White Noise (1984)

 

 3 U R O R J X H   6 W U H H W  / H Y H O
        |        6   7   5   (   (   7      /   (   9   ( /
Out on the street, a cool night rain blurs the lights of the city, 
and water slowly drips off the signs. You step into a doorway to 
look at your phone. Kept dry there, up under the canvas awning, 
a speaker showers you with tinny tunes. Yet you no more notice 
these than the video display in the window, or the messages on 
your phone for that matter, for a splash from the sidewalk has 
soaked your shoes, and in this moment of disorientation, something just feels very good.

Maybe the water streaming over every surface helped, but, 
for a second, the world seemed of a piece, not just made of so 
many  competing  links,  but  somehow  more  immediate,  with 
order and measure, a patchwork that for a moment you felt as 
one coherent space. In this sidewalk epiphany, the usual chaos of 
so many shallow short messages momentarily gave way to a presence  that  felt  whole,  of  much  higher  resolution,  in  a  word: 
replete.1  What  felt  good  was  seeing  more  where  you  looked, 
instead of quickly wanting to look away. The rain brought out 
colors  in  the  stone.  The  world  became  inexhaustibly  detailed 
and present, in ways that a flickering picture is not. And, for a 
moment,  maybe  because  you  saw  them  streaked  by  the  rain, 
even the glowing rectangles of your phone and the video display 
felt like features of this one, immediate, urban space, rather than 
simply portals onto other spaces, with furnished perspectives, all 
at  no  particular  distance.  For  a  moment,  it  seemed  as  if  the 
sphere  of  information  was  embodied  persistently  in  a  physical 
commons. The sights and sounds of the city, the noisy, numbing  vitality  that  leaves  city  dwellers  experiencing  daily  life  in  a 
state  of  distraction, well,  it  all  felt  different for a  second.  Here 
was kind of attention that you could perhaps re-create, maintain, 
and manage, as if it would affect whatever else you notice. For 

  3   5   2 /  2   *   8   (      |        
one  replete  moment,  you  could  understand  the  workings  of 
attention, and how it might be worth knowing them better in an 
age of overload.

When  you  perceive  the  whole  environment  more  and  its 
individual  signals  less,  when  at  least  some  of  the  information 
superabundance  assumes  embodied,  inhabitable  form,  when 
your attention isn't being stolen, when you feel renewed sensibility to your surroundings you might try calling this ambient. 

 

 ,
 , G H D V  R I  W K H  $ P E L H Q W

 

What do you notice? As a flood of information pours into ever 
more  aspects  of  life,  your  focus  becomes  vital.  Attention  has 
become something to guard and to manage. Ambient Commons 
aims to  help you cultivate  yours through  a rediscovery  of your 
surroundings.

Right now your everyday environments are filling with ever 
more kinds of information, in ever newer formats of technology, 
used in ever more activities of life. Some of these make the world 
more  understandable,  even  pleasant,  but  many  less  helpful  ones 
prove difficult to escape. Whether carried about in your bag, hung 
on  walls,  or  built  into  everyday  objects,  media  feeds  seem  to  be 
everywhere,  as  if  people  would  suffer  without  them.  Unlike  the 
soot and din of a bygone industrial age, many of these feeds have 
been placed deliberately, and many of them appeal to the senses.

The appeal of this interface culture seems especially evident 
in the number of people walking (or driving) around staring at 
their  smartphones.  The  interface  arts  have  become  the  most 

 
 $ P E L H Q W

      |        $   0   % ,  (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
prominent arts, especially since technology has spread beyond the 
desktop, work has left the office, and social play has networked at 
street  level.  There,  as  positional  technology  comes  of  age,  new 
forms  of  interfaces  reconnect  to  the  world  around--not  just 
coordinates or tags for places to go, but also a dense aggregation 
of other technologies about environments, cities, and buildings.

Lately, that aggregation has been changing. There has been 
an invasion of glowing rectangles--ever more computer screens 
of ever more sizes, in ever more places.1 And not just an invasion 
of screens but also one of networked objects, sensor fields, positional traces, information shadows, and "big data." This new era 
of interface designs is transforming the use of the city. Car and 
bike share systems for instance, would not have worked as well 
before now. Also on the rise are do-it-yourself applications and 
installations to monitor, tag, catalog, or curate everything from 
local plants to historical images to neighborhood lore. Many of 
these  productions  are  said  to  "augment"  their  immediate  surroundings,  not  just  fill  them  with  feeds  and  pointers  to  someplace  else.  Yet  however  much  augmented,  the  city  is  also 
unmediated experience: fixed forms persist underneath all these 
augmentations and data flows, and for that you might be thankful.  Without  persistent  environments,  the  sense  of  confusion 
and  flux  might  only  worsen.  To  have  forgotten  surroundings 
may indeed be a cause of overload in the first place.

Remembering can occur one detail at a time. A patch of sun 
slowly crossing a wall might produce a sense of calm while you 
work (figure 1.1). It might remind you how not all that informs 
has been encoded and sent. Its higher resolution and lower visual 
demands can restore your attention in a world that is otherwise 
too often low resolution and insistent.

  $   0   % ,  (   1   7      |      
      High resolution, low pace: a patch of sun crosses a wall.
       |        $   0   % ,  (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

Similarly,  the  layout  of  your  studio  might  affect  the  work 
you do there. Its tools and configurations could suggest possibilities. In many such everyday situations, the intrinsic structure of 
embodied space may affect your habits more than you know. It 
might actually shape some of your thoughts. Technology designers, neuroscientists, architects, and personal productivity consultants increasingly seem to agree on that.

Sometimes when people in many separate fields find themselves working in parallel on what proves to be one overarching 
issue,  that  issue  acquires  a  new  name.  Getting  a  name  then 
makes this subject matter more accessible, and brings still other 
fields  into  the  conversation.  "Light  pollution,"  for  instance, 
identifies  an  important  interdisciplinary  set  of  concerns  that 
were  formerly  much  more  difficult  to  address.  For  many  such 
phenomena, historians later take interest in how the name first 
caught  on.  "Information  commons"  arose  in  the  late  1990s  to 
emphasize  intellectual  property  regimes  on  the  net.  "Ambient 
information"  caught  on  in  the  first  decade  of  the  new  millennium,  as  smart  things,  tangible  interfaces,  ubiquitous  displays, 
and  perpetual  messaging  all  came  into  their  own.  "Ambient 
commons" isn't yet such a phrase: apart from a few musicians, 
almost nobody uses it. "Commons" itself seems familiar enough, 
maybe too much so through its many misuses. "Ambient" seems 
the more inviting way to begin. 

 : K D W  , V  $ P E L H Q W "
The word ambient usually occurs as an adjective. Ambient light, 
for  example,  lets  you  see  the  north  face  of  a  mountain,  which 
(on  the  northern  half  of  the  planet)  is  always  in  the  shade. 
Ambient temperature and lighting systems, the subject matter of 

  $   0   % ,  (   1   7      |       
environmental technology, are now being rediscovered by architects and put to use in green building. 

Perhaps the most culturally resonant use of the word occurs 
as ambient music. Search "ambient commons" and you will find 
mostly musicians describing their small communities of practice. 
Ambient music is no small niche, however; critic Mark Prendergast proclaimed the last one hundred years of music the "Ambient Century."2 His book by that name traced musical influences 
past landmarks such as Miles Davis's  In a Silent Way, or more 
esoterically, the humming power lines of La Monte Young--all 
the way back to the pioneering works of Claude Debussy, who 
famously wrote: "I should prefer the creation of a music that has 
neither motifs nor themes, a more universal music."3 Yet, across 
the  intervening  century,  what  really  became  universal  was  the 
listening, which became possible to do almost anywhere. Today 
you  can  buy  underwater  speakers  for  your  swimming  pool.  If 
Debussy were to visit, how might he react to Pink Floyd cascading from supermarket ceilings?

Even more ubiquitous than audio, there is ambient advertising. This expression generally means advertising in proximity to 
the point of interest. It also means subtle: the advertising industry  wants  its  messages  to  be  remembered, but  unnoticed.  Subtlety  has  everything  to  do  with  placement.  As  one  agency's 
mission  statement  once  explained:  "Ambient  Planet  delivers 
marketing  messages  to  consumers  wherever  they  may  be  and 
preferably in the environment where they would be most receptive  to  the  message."4  For  a  long  time  now,  "out-of-home" 
advertising has been the biggest growth horizon for the industry. 
Although  huge  electronic  billboards  cause  more  controversy, 
smaller advertisements appear almost everywhere, as if no surface 

       |        $   0   % ,  (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
is too small to be left bare. Then, where every surface has already 
been covered, additional panels may be attached, as to the hoses 
of gas pumps. There is always room for more: as yet, nobody has 
bought the naming rights to the sides of the second base bag at 
Yankee Stadium, which has high exposure to camera feeds; even 
that could be unsurprising. Altogether, advertising stops at nothing. As a cultural force, it has few equals. And as environmental 
experience, it  often leaves you little choice but to tune out the 
world.

Perhaps just as powerfully, social media also lay a claim to 
the  word  ambient.  Small  everyday  signals  of  activity  can  be 
enough to tell you someone is around, to let you feel that you are 
together, without your having to speak or meet face-to-face every 
day. As explained in Lisa Reichelt's Twitter-friendly coinage of 
"ambient intimacy,"5 social media use countless trivial messages 
to  build  a  detailed  portrait,  even  an  imagined  presence,  of  a 
friend. At least to some degree, this restores a lost kind of awareness found in traditional life. The upstairs shutters are opened, 
the bicycle is gone from its usual spot at the usual time, deliveries  are  being  made,  and  the  neighbors  are  gossiping.  To  their 
enthusiasts,  social  media  re-create  some  of  this  environmental 
sense, albeit across the necessary distances and at the accelerated 
paces of the metropolis.

On the ascent of Twitter in 2008, New York Times columnist 
Clive Thompson explained the "paradox of ambient awareness":

Each  little  update--each  individual  bit  of  social  information--is insignificant on its own, even supremely mundane. 
But  taken  together,  over  time,  the  little  snippets  coalesce 
into a surprisingly sophisticated portrait of your friends' and 

  $   0   % ,  (   1   7      |       
family  members'  lives,  like  thousands  of  dots  making  a 
pointillist painting. This was never before possible, because 
in the real world, no friend would bother to call you up and 
detail the sandwiches she was eating. The ambient information becomes like "a type of E.S.P.," as Haley described it to 
me, an invisible dimension floating over everyday life.6

Ambient awareness can reflect a more general mindfulness, 
of  course.  Almost  any  use  of  the  word  ambient  suggests  some 
aspect  of  sensibility.  Once  considered  irrelevant  or  a  luxury  in 
modern  industrial  cultures,  sensibility  to  surroundings  has 
become  important  again.  In  an  era  of  changing  planetary  circumstances,  personal  attention  to  immediate  surroundings 
seems  like  a  manageable  first  step  toward  some  huge  cultural 
shift. Amid that transformation, the role of technology shifts as 
well, away from a means to overcome the world toward a means 
to understand it.

To  information  technologists,  ambient  interface  represents 
an important new paradigm, with ubiquity and embodiment as 
first principles. Interaction design, the discipline best positioned 
to affect how you deal with technology, shapes not only sensory 
smartphones but also situated technologies. This is the form of 
ambient of most interest here. 

 $ P E L H Q W  , Q W H U I D F H
The  interface  arts address  the  play  of  attention.  To  create  ever 
more usable interfaces, designers work to reduce cognitive load: 
better  design  makes  technology  more  intuitive  and  less  obtrusive. Until recently, interaction designers have focused more on 
how users apply technology in the foreground of attention, as a 

       |        $   0   % ,  (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
deliberative task, for an intended purpose--and less on the role 
of context, or the importance of tacit knowledge, and how these 
shape  intent.  Within  the  arts  of  interface,  ambient  has  been  a 
fairly recent development.

Around the  millennium, a  paradigm shift from cyberspace 
to pervasive computing began to change those goals. Instead of 
mostly sitting passively at a desk, ("parking your atoms," as they 
said in the 1990s), users increasingly brought technology along 
into  the  existing  world,  in  all  its  messy  complexity,  and  sometimes they also built more of it in. Interaction designers turned 
to making new kinds of interfaces for this newly hybrid reality. 
The more their interface designs employed physical gestures or 
presence, became parts of larger objects, and seemed to fill the 
world, the more those interfaces could be said to embody information.  To  speak  of  embodied  information  helps  to  emphasize 
that not all computing is mobile; there are situated technologies, 
too. 

Research  in  "ambient"  technology  began  well  before  these 
recent  interests.  For  example,  one  seminal  project  from  the 
1990s was the "Ambient Room" at the MIT Media Lab.7 In this 
cubicle-as-monitor, the most noteworthy surface was the ceiling, 
which projected an animation of waves radiating across a water 
surface. The speed and size of these waves reflected different data 
of the occupant's choosing. This space may have been the first to 
move the display from figure to background. Since then, information  technologies  have  moved  the  display  still  farther  away, 
with nontextual background representations of markets, traffic, 
energy usage, and more. These technologies are no longer something to sit at; they no longer command full attention.

  $   0   % ,  (   1   7      |       
Ideas of the ambient have their philosophical basis in embodiment  as  described  by  mid-twentieth-century  phenomenologists, 
most notably, Edmund Husserl and Maurice Merleau-Ponty. In 
his influential 2001 interpretation of these foundations for pervasive computing, interaction designer Paul Dourish explained: 
"I  am  using  the  term  [embodiment]  to  capture  a  sense  of  phenomenological  presence,  the  way  that  a  variety  of  interactive 
phenomena  arise  from  direct  and  engaged  participation  in  the 
world."8 Direct and engaged action makes use of innate familiarity with physical objects and situations. The early command line 
or  later  "graphical  user  interface"  of  desktop  computers  didn't 
allow for much of this intuition. Better future interfaces, better 
embodied in life's social actions, could eventually reward other 
kinds  of  attention.  Many  of  these  ideas  came  together  at  the 
famed  think  tank  Xerox  PARC,  where  anthropologist  Lucy 
Suchman introduced Silicon Valley to "situated action," director 
John  Seely  Brown  emphasized  the  attentional  principle  of 
"periphery," and chief technology officer Mark Weiser famously 
coined "ubiquitous computing."9 To Weiser and Brown, periphery was everything you were aware of that didn't consume your 
attention,  and  that  could  be  brought  to  the  center  of  focus  if 
necessary. 

Much  has  happened  in  neuroscience  since  these  ideas  first 
caught  on  in  interaction  design.  Today,  ambiently  embodied 
interfaces  have  active  research  communities,  widespread 
instances in the electronic arts, and a burgeoning academic literature. Recent technological trends (which are the catalyst for but 
not the focus of this inquiry) have embedded computation into 
many more features of the world. Electronic positioning through 
the  Global  Positioning  System  (GPS),  tagging  through  radio 

       |        $   0   % ,  (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
frequency  identification  (RFID),  distributed  environmental 
sensing (now cheap and wireless), and ad hoc local communication (Bluetooth) all contribute to these developments. Weatherproof  displays  on  ever  smaller  and  larger  scales  place  live  data 
into  just  about  any  setting.  Augmented  overlays  for  smartphones-as-cursors  make  the  physical  city  browsable.  Smarter, 
greener  cities  could  become  a  "killer  app"  for  these  combined 
technologies. The expanding new field of urban informatics (also 
known as the augmented city or urban computing) seeks to collect, 
share,  embed,  and  interpret  urban  infrastructural  and  environmental data. This agenda has become vital to the cultural imperatives  of  urban  resilience,  livability,  and  socialization.  That 
makes  interaction  design  ever  more  significant  as  a  cultural 
endeavor,  and  more  like  architecture.  It  also  makes  it  more 
ambient. As Dan Hill, an influential blogger of urban informatics  once  put  it:  "Multisensory  interaction  design  now  merges 
with architecture, planning, and urbanism, informed by a gentle 
ambient drizzle of everyday data--and so a new soft city is being 
created, alive once again to the touch of its citizens."10

Alas, pervasive computing can also mean ever more surveillance and ever more autonomous annoyances. The possibilities 
for overload and resentment seem endless. And alas, ignoring all 
these  prospects may not  work.  To  go back to  a  world without 
pervasive computing may be no more possible than going back 
to life before, say, electric lighting. So the challenge is to develop 
new  cultural  responses  in  the  interface  arts,  as  citizen  sciences, 
and  for  the  information  commons.  Although  the  latest  techniques of interaction design lie outside this inquiry, they do help 
justify  it.  For  as  ever,  any  culture  is  better  off  seeking  ways  to 
make  new technologies more aesthetic and  more humane  than 

  $   0   % ,  (   1   7      |       
assuming  they  will  become  so  on  their  own,  or  wishing  they 
would simply go away. 

 , Q  $  6 L Q J O H  1 D P H
Although  ambient  appears  as  an  adjective  in  the  increasingly 
familiar combinations above, it less often appears on its own as a 
noun.  "Ambience,"  the  most  usual  form,  has  less  than  helpful 
connotations, for it sounds like a luxury. It suggests a cultivated 
atmosphere that you might pay for in a restaurant, a theater, or 
a club.11 By contrast, the design challenge of attention amid an 
age  of  information  superabundance  seems  like  a  necessity  to 
consider. This challenge invites a fresh form of use for ambient. 

Thus this inquiry adopts the ambient as a simple name for a 
complex  set  of  phenomena.  This  strange  noun  form  is  hardly 
intended to stick as a neologism, for it immediately seems far too 
inclusive  for  use  anywhere  but  here.  Here  it  may  prove  quite 
helpful, however. It usefully conflates several noteworthy conditions found where a new attitude about attention meets new era 
of information technology becoming situated in the world. You 
may never see or use this word in this way anywhere else, but for 
present purposes, consider twelve ways of describing the ambient 
(figure 1.2).

You  may  find  some  of  these  conditions  more  vivid  than 
others. The ambient suggests some recognition of a whole, like 
noticing a forest and not just trees. Seen whole, most environments mostly seem unconsidered, chaotic, distracting, or forbidding.  Exceptions  exist  in  better  buildings,  neighborhoods,  and 
cities--and in pristine wilderness, although today it is important 
to  recognize  environment  as  something  more  than  places 
untouched by technology. Understanding the built environment 

       |        $   0   % ,  (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
      Twelve ways of understanding the ambient.

  $   0   % ,  (   1   7      |       
better has to be a step in understanding humanity's larger place 
in the world. Media situated in the built environment may help 
build that understanding. In comparison with any previous age, 
however,  so  many  more  facets  of  today's  experience  have  been 
mediated so skillfully that they increasingly merge with perceptions  of  the  world.  The  use  of  information  technology  has 
become  increasingly  circumstantial:12  interspersed  with  other 
sensibilities,  contingencies,  and  actions.  Is  this  rich  chaos  of 
experience  a  new  subject  matter  for  design?  Or  for  policy?  Or 
environmental  history?  Does  it  become  some  new  sort  of  cultural commons? This inquiry invites you to consider such questions. It has chosen to begin from the word ambient. If it had to 

 & 2 * 1 , 7 , 9 (  / 2 $ '

 ) 2 & $ /  $ 7 7 ( 1 7 , 2 1
 + , * +

 / 2 :

 / 2 : + , * +
  & X O W X U D O  Z K L W H Q R L V H 

  & R Q W H P S O D W L Y H  D U W V 

 & R Q Y H Q W L R Q D O 

 ´ P H G L D µ

 6 X U U R X Q G L Q J V
 $ P E L H Q W 

 W D Q J L E O H 
 S H U Y D V L Y H 

 P H G L D

      As media move into the background, do they augment it or just cover it?

       |        $   0   % ,  (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
begin  from  just  one  question,  however,  that  might  be  this:  do 
increasingly  situated  information  technologies  illuminate  the 
world, or do they just eclipse it (figure 1.3)?

May  the  ambient  invite  tuning  in  instead  of  tuning  out. 
May it  do so with an emergent sense of a whole, or at least of 
continuum.  Continuity  seems  lacking  in  a  world  full  of  separately  conceived  physical  entities  all  competing  for  space  and 
attention, all without concern for what is nearby, and masked by 
portals, links, and signs to someplace else.

The word  ambient has its origins in embodiment as a cosmological embrace--the firmament seen as a protective dome, as 
the vault of the heavens. In the ancient Greek worldview, under 
the  aegis  of  the  gods,  the  sheltering  sky  was  inseparable  from 
what the modern age calls "air."13 To say that an idea has been 
"in the air" is quite normal and reflects a sense that each place 
and time has its own intellectual atmosphere.

Today, the rediscovery of air has become a prominent philosophical theme. After all, atmospheric science tells the most profound story of the times. Thus it has become a popular parable 
to retell how, in the eighteenth century, Joseph Priestley discovered  oxygen--how  it  is  oxygen  specifically,  and  not  some 
abstract divine aether, that one must inhale for life, and that fire 
needs for combustion.14 Earlier, Rene' Descartes knew air only as 
"matie`re  subtile";  Newton  referred  to  it  as  an  "ambient 
medium";  earlier  still,  Galileo  Galilei  referred  to  physical  phenomena being contained in "l'ambiente."15 In more ancient use, 
the word ambient goes back to the Latin ambire, to "go round," 
"visit  in  rotation,"  "inspect,"  "solicit,"  "canvass,"  "encircle,"  or 
"embrace." The idiom "aer ambiens" meant "atmosphere,"  the 
"encircling air," although not quite the "sheltering sky."

  $   0   % ,  (   1   7      |       
This legacy of the ambient appears most richly probed in a 
rediscovered essay, "Milieu and Ambiance" (1942), by the Viennese philologist Leo Spitzer.16 Milieu, which combines the prefix 
for "middle" with the word for "place" in French, was the more 
widely  used  word  at  the  time,  in  English  as  well,  and  meant  a 
person's  social  setting,  surroundings,  or  ensemble  of  circumstances.  Like  the  German  Umwelt  (literally,  "surrounding 
world"),  milieu  and  ambiance  also  implied  an  environmental 
influence on outlook or action. As such, both words often served 
the purposes of literary realists and sociological positivists of the 
late  nineteenth  and  early  twentieth  century,  the  influential 
Berlin sociologist Georg Simmel for one, to whom the modernist notion of distraction is most normally traced. In "Milieu and 
Ambiance,"  Spitzer  connected  this  modern  sociological  notion 
back to ancient Greek and Roman cosmologies in which mortals 
did  not  merely  occupy  their  environment,  but  indeed  were 
embraced by it. "For the Latin verb ambire had not only the literal  meaning  of  the  Greek  verb  !0!$0#;  it  possessed  as  well 
the  same  connotation  of  protection,  of  a  warm  embrace:  cf. 
[Pliny]:  "domis  ambiri  vitium  palmitibus  ac  sequacibus  loris,"17 
Although competing versions and translations of Pliny the Elder 
exist,  one  reading  is  this,  "a  country  house  embraced  in  the 
shoots of closely reined straps of grapevine."18 Except now make 
that  carefully  switched  runs  of  fiber-optic  cables.  Today,  that 
embrace is by information.

 $  1 H Z  ) L U P D P H Q W
For a  metaphor of  this embrace, imagine  information technology as a modern firmament. The famous woodcut from Camille 
Flammarion's  The  Atmosphere  (1888)  depicts  a  firmament  in 

       |        $   0   % ,  (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

      Firmament and beyond: the "Flammarion woodcut" (by an unknown artist that first appeared in Camille Flammarion's L'atmosphe`re: me'te'orologie 
populaire, 1888) (Wikimedia Commons).

  $   0   % ,  (   1   7      |       
which a medieval man dares to look beyond the sheltering sky, 
into the modern technological world (figure 1.4).

When  a  lonely  person  pulls  out  his  or  her  smartphone,  is 
that  to  seek  the  cosmological  comfort  of  a  new  kind  of  firmament? To judge by the widespread casual use of media, the very 
presence of information seems to soothe more than its absence. 
Restaurants place televisions around as much for comfort as for 
any  actual  viewing.  Stores  all  play  music,  and  if  you  ask  why, 
their managers will tell you that silence is bad for business, for it 
makes people uncomfortable.

Notions  of  media  dependencies  amid  jaded  overload  have 
been prominent in cultural theory for more than a century, ever 
since  the  work  of  Simmel  and  his  contemporary,  Emile 
Durkheim, became known. Indeed, ever since modern industrial 
urbanization,  when  so  many  new  technologies  pulled  so  many 
communications out of their traditional cultural contexts, a blase' 
outlook has  been the norm among city dwellers. The time has 
come  to  reconsider  that  oft-cited  trope.  Today,  you  must 
remember to look to the other side of the technological firmament, into a timeless but endangered world of direct experience. 

The  experience  of  technology  has  changed  so  much  since 
the industrial city and the heyday of print and broadcast media 
that it is time to reexamine the urban citizen's distraction. Much 
of the change has been away from command by any one information  medium.  The  world  has  been  filling  with  many  new 
kinds  of  ambient  interfaces.  Nothing  may  be  designed  on  the 
assumption that it will be noticed. Many more things must be 
designed and used with the ambient in mind. Under these circumstances, you might want to rethink attention.

       |        $   0   % ,  (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

       $ 0 % , ( 1 7 
   0 D L Q  L G H D    7 K H  D P E L H Q W  F R X O G  L O O X P L Q D W H  W K H  Z R U O G  R U  M X V W  K L G H  L W 
   & R X Q W H U D U J X P H Q W     : K R  F D U H V  D E R X W  F R Q W H [ W " 
   . H \  W H U P V     $ P E L H Q W   L Q W H U I D F H   I L U P D P H Q W
   : K D W  K D V  F K D Q J H G       0 R U H  F R Q W H [ W V  D Q G  I R U P D W V  R I  L Q I R U P D W L R Q 
   & D W D O \ V W     3 H U Y D V L Y H  F R P S X W L Q J 
   5 H O D W H G  I L H O G     , Q W H U D F W L R Q  G H V L J Q
   2 S H Q  G H E D W H     + R O G L Q J  R Q W R  U H D O L W \ "

 

 
 , Q I R U P D W L R Q

Light in the east  means day is coming.  Although a sunrise can 
mean much more, such as a fresh start, or hope, it always indicates  a  day,  and  it  does  so  without  intervention  of  language, 
symbolism, or code--no instructions are necessary.1

At  a  crosswalk,  a  sound  signal  slowly  ticks  until  the  lights 
change and pedestrians may safely walk. Then it rapidly tocks. 
This audible code has been installed not just for the blind, but 
also  for  those  whose  attention  is  somewhere  else,  fixed  on  a 
friend or a phone perhaps. Any set of sounds might work for this 
purpose,  but  higher  frequencies  would  carry  into  neighboring 
buildings,  and  lower  frequencies  would  get  masked  by  the 
rumble  of  trucks  going  by.  A  synthetic  voice  could  command 
crossers  to  "Wait!  .  .  .  Wait!"  but  that  would  be  unnecessarily 
disruptive.2 A better design would provide a signal clearly audible to those waiting to cross but not audible to others who aren't 
at the crosswalk, one that allowed waiting pedestrians to carry on 
with other activities, like conversation or texting. For even those 

       |        $   0   % ,  (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
who don't push the crosswalk signal's activation button are subjected  to  its  effects  and  become  involuntary  "users"  of  the 
experience.

Five  friends  work  their  way  across  the  metropolis  on 
crowded  transit lines.  Along  the  way,  they  text  one  another  to 
negotiate a destination. The outcome will depend on positions 
of other nearby friends sitting in cafe's, where they have checked 
in using social navigation apps such as FourSquare. The five use 
the  interplay  of  noise  and  information  to  drift  gracefully  from 
group to group.

One  morning,  as  you  arrive  at  work,  you  notice  a  brandnew  sign  declaring  that  parking  is  to  the  left.  Was  someone 
unable to see the cars parked over there? Perhaps there is someone so steeped in perpetual messages that nothing remains selfevident.  Perhaps  everything  needs  applied  documentation,  as 
when, to learn another language, you go around the house putting  yellow  stickies  on everything,  with  strange  new  names  for 
things you know well.

These examples illustrate a spectrum of mediation. Although 
each describes a situation that informs, they differ in the degree 
of instruction, from none for dawn, to adequate and impersonal 
at  the  crosswalk,  to  abundant  and  personal  between  texting 
friends, to superfluous and impersonal at the parking lot. They 
illustrate  how  just  enough  mediation  can  be  helpful  without 
intruding, how even ample mediation can be both helpful and 
pleasant, but how superfluous mediation reinforces being out of 
touch with the world. As explained by philosopher Albert Borgmann, some information is about reality; some is for reality, to 
create it, as plans do; and some gets taken as reality, that is, without referents in unmediated experience.3

  ,   1   )   2   5   0 $  7  ,  2   1      |       
They also illustrate augmentation. Richer, more enjoyable, 
more empowering, more ubiquitous media become much more 
difficult  to  separate  from  spatial  experience.  You  perceive  the 
world largely through what you can do with it. Today those possibilities  have  an  ever  broader  spectrum  and  deeper  volume  of 
mediation. Latter-day milieus are mostly found in communications.  Having  noted  the  origins  of  the  ambient  in  notions  of 
cosmological embrace, you might now ask if today's embrace is 
by information.

 6 X S H U D E X Q G D Q F H
In  ways  perhaps  second  only  to  planetary  change,  information 
superabundance  is  the  quality  that  most  distinguishes  these 
times  from  even  very  recent  ones.  Unlike  planetary  change, 
superabundance gives cause to rejoice: all the world at your fingertips,  on  demand,  and  no  need  to  clutter  your  head  with  it. 
Having a hundred times more items available on any given topic 
than  there  were  just  a  short  time  ago  might  seem  daunting,  if 
they weren't so often a thousand times easier to find, filter, sort, 
and  trace.  You  hardly  meet  anyone  who  laments  how  much 
better life was before Google. Young thinkers today might well 
wonder  how,  before  the  net,  anyone  pursued  ideas  that  interested them.

Just  how  much  information  has  become  possible  to  estimate.  According  to  a  famous  study  in  2003,  for  instance,  the 
amount  of  new  information  that  year  was  the  equivalent  of 
forty-seven times the contents of the Library of Congress.4 In the 
decade  since,  the  annual  flow  rates  of  many  individual  genres, 
such as video sharing, phone call archiving, or library-like reference materials, may each have reached that volume. In 2010, the 

       |        $   0   % ,  (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
Economist reported that humankind first produced data at a rate 
of a trillion gigabytes per year in 2009, up by factor of 8 in half a 
decade.5  Also  in  2010,  Google  CEO  Eric  Schmidt  announced 
that "every  two  days we  create as  much information  as  we did 
from the dawn of civilization until 2003."6

Information  ethicists  caution  that,  by  overwhelming  your 
capacity for reflection and empathy, this superabundance poses a 
real  threat  to  judgment, well-being,  and  relations  with others.7 
Being  overwhelmed  with  information  tempts  people  to  accept 
what is most agreeable and convenient. Convenience discourages 
extra expenditure of attention. Not everyone takes the trouble to 
judge the quality of the information items they most easily find, 
to reason about opposing views, or to remember that it is only 
information of a kind, and not the world itself.

Choice  theorists  caution  that,  beyond  some  sufficient 
threshold, abundance just bewilders. The more kinds of soap on 
the  shelves  of  your  supermarket,  the  less  likely  you  are  to  buy 
any  of  them.8  Whether  choosing  a  hotel,  reading  about  the 
music  you  are  listening  to,  or  debating  a  finer  philosophical 
point,  any  moment  of  curiosity  can  quickly  produce  so  much 
information that you may feel helpless. Having so many options 
only  increases  the  chance  that  other  aims  will  arise  before  you 
can act on your present ones, all the more so when your inquiry 
brings forth information with weak connections to your present 
aims.  Thus,  as  is  commonly  known  among  designers,  but  suffered everywhere anyway, data that do not inform only produce 
anxiety.

Social historians often warn of the unintended consequences 
of sudden infatuations with new technologies. Just as Americans 
rushed to do anything and everything in cars half a century ago, 

  ,   1   )   2   5   0 $  7  ,  2   1      |       
so,  today,  people  worldwide  are  rushing  to  do  anything  and 
everything on socially linked smart devices, often all at once. It 
was  decades  before  experts  recognized  the  physical,  social,  and 
environmental health consequences of overreliance on the automobile. How long will it take to recognize the consequences of 
much wider overreliance on smart devices?

All told, today's flood of information seems far less than the 
absolute good technological stakeholders make it out to be. To 
an educated person, retained knowledge would have once been 
much  more  of  an  asset.  To  just  about  anyone,  life  had  fewer 
occasions of bewildering detail and more to use common sense. 
An older person who spent more time outdoors growing up than 
generations  since  might  marvel  how  youngsters  walk  around 
with  headphones  but  without  coats,  connected  but  oblivious, 
bare-toed  in  flip-flops  in  the  snow.  So  called  "digital  natives" 
counter that the outdoors is a bore, and this superabundance of 
information is almost all delight and no distraction.9 Whatever 
you grow up doing reshapes your brain, they claim. And however you have educated yourself, you have learned how to tune 
most things out, even freezing toes. 

Today,  at  one  and  the  same  time,  there  exist  some  of  the 
most  distracted  human  beings  ever  alongside  unprecedented 
new  degrees  of  attention  management.10  For  the  sake  of  argument,  consider  such  management  as  involving  two  basic 
approaches  to  superabundance.  One  consists  of  good  filtering. 
Paradoxically, the best way to deal with so much information is 
usually more information: metadata, usage histories, recommendations,  source  certifications,  blockers  and  aggregators,  social 
networks.  By  contrast,  a  second  approach  consists  of  mindful 
abstinence. Of choosing to ignore noises from the street; to skip 

       |        $   0   % ,  (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
24/7  news;  to  turn  off  the  smartphone  when  with  friends;  to 
multitask  only  for  fun;  to  stay  off  the  net  one  day  a  week;  to 
ignore  the  latest  titles  from  Hollywood;  to  listen  to  live  music 
often;  to  look  up  at  the  architecture  around  you  from  time  to 
time,  and  not  just  down  at  your  screen;  to  enjoy  something 
without feeling the urge to message a  friend about it;  to know 
what phase the moon is in, and how to stay still long enough to 
watch the stars wheel across the night sky, at least where you can 
actually see them. Today both of these approaches seem necessary,  to  some  degree. What  is  more, attention  to  surroundings 
may  serve  both  of  them.  To  abstain  from  some  less  necessary 
stimuli may help you notice the role of context for filtering other 
more necessary ones. 

Today almost anyone can admit some sense of information 
overload,  most  often  describing  it  with  metaphors  of  flow: 
drinking  from  a  fire  hose,  surfing  on  chaos,  streaming  your 
feeds. Thus even the labels on bottled water sold at The Henry 
Ford, a museum with millions of artifacts, bear such a metaphor: 
"In  your  quest  for  knowledge,  be  sure  not  to  drown  in  all  the 
information."

"Information overload" was coined by Future Shock author 
Alvin  Toffler  about  forty  years  ago,  and  "information  anxiety" 
by  Richard  Saul  Wurman  about  twenty-five  years  ago.  (Figure 
2.1 graphs the usage of overload since 1910.)11 Despite coming 
before the web, search engines, or smartphones, many of Wurman's conclusions remain pertinent today. "The word `inform' 
has been stripped out of the noun `information,' and the form or 
structure has disappeared from the verb `inform,'" he cautioned. 
To  be  informative,  data  require  not  only  proper  design  and 
form-giving,  which  was  Wurman's  expertise,  but  also  at  least 

  ,   1   )   2   5   0 $  7  ,  2   1      |       
some degree of attention. Overload has to do with capacity, and 
that has to do with sensibilities. "Before you can curb your information  intake,"  Wurman  advised,  "you  have  to  come  to  an 
understanding of who you are."12

"You  are  what  you  attend  to,"13  to  paraphrase  the  first 
modern  psychologist,  William  James,  whose  work  from  over  a 
century ago remains an obligatory part of the attention literature 
to  this  day.  Now,  as  a  paradigm  shift  in  cognitive  science  has 
many  asking  if  anyone  really  knows  what  attention  is,  this 
inquiry will need to go beneath the surface of such aphorisms. 

The problem of attention was also famously identified by the 
information scientist Herb Simon, in another inexhaustible aphorism, written right about the same time that Toffler coined "future 
shock."  Simon,  the  main  thinker  behind  the  rise  of  Carnegie 
Mellon, wrote in 1971: "In an information-rich world, the wealth 
of  information  means  a  dearth  of  something  else:  a  scarcity  of 
whatever it is that information consumes. What information consumes is rather obvious: it consumes the attention of its recipients. 

      Increasing use of overload and related expressions (a Google nGram).
       |        $   0   % ,  (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
Hence a wealth of information creates a poverty of attention and a 
need  to  allocate  that  attention  efficiently  among  the  overabundance of information sources that might consume it."14

 2 Y H U F R Q V X P S W L R Q
"Is there anywhere on earth exempt from these swarms of new 
books?" asked Erasmus, the first modern editor, in the sixteenth 
century.15  Indeed,  sensitive  souls  through  the  ages  have  complained  of  information  overload,  long  before  there  were  computer networks.16 The historian Ann Blair has assembled many 
such  remarks  from  scholars  in  information  overload's  early 
years. "The early modern experience of overload was different in 
many  ways  from  today's,"  Blair  has  observed.  "For  example, 
then only an educated elite and a few areas of life were affected. 
Today people in nearly every walk of life, at least in the developed world, rely on the Internet for much of their basic information. What we share with our ancestors, though, is the sense 
of excess."17

Because overload is a perception of excess, anyone in any era 
might  have  felt  it,  wherever  circumstances  exceeded  expectations.18  Historians  often  speculate  whether,  in  a  world  where  a 
printed page or painted image was rare, it might have had a much 
greater impact. Or whether, in a world not yet saturated in media 
or disenchanted by modern science and economics, direct experience  itself  might  have  been  much  more  vivid,  perhaps  overwhelmingly  so.19  Whenever  a  new  medium  arose  or  become 
arbitrarily fashionable, it may have been experienced entirely out 
of proportion with existing cultural capacities to make sense of it. 
Thus  a  seventeenth-century  Amsterdam  merchant  gathering 
news  of  arriving  ships  might  well  have  felt  overwhelmed  with 

  ,   1   )   2   5   0 $  7  ,  2   1      |       
information,  though  he  wouldn't  have  used  that  word.  Nineteenth-century  commentators  ranted  about  the  growing  obsession  with  that  antisocial  new  creation,  the  newspaper.20  In  a 
world where mediated communications were not nearly so pervasive as they are today, such overconsumption was more localized, 
confined largely  to the literary  salon. Besides  being  confined  to 
particular settings, this overconsumption was also confined to a 
privileged few. Some literary critics think the first person to suffer 
overload was a nobleman: Don Quixote, the fictional protagonist 
of the first modern novel, became delusional from overconsumption of medieval romances, formerly scarce but now easily obtainable in print editions.

"Just as fat has replaced starvation as the nation's number one 
dietary  concern,"  sociologist  David  Shenk  wrote  in  the  1997, 
"information  overload  has  replaced  information  scarcity  as  an 
important new emotional, social, and political problem."21 At least 
for the luckiest billion humans, the supply of mediated stimulus, 
like the supply of food, is at an all-time high. When a formerly 
scarce resource becomes abundant, people instinctively consume it 
wherever  and  whenever  they  can,  which  naturally  leads to overconsumption. Empty calories in the echo chambers of blogs and 
retweets instantly gratify the need to tell somebody whenever anything occurs to you. Much as with overconsumption of unprecedentedly available sugar and fat, overconsumption of informational 
empty calories can lead to what some critics now call "information 
obesity." 22  Messages, music, movies, and market prices are always 
on and gently drift by, not just at the workplace but in most settings. Habits of consuming and switching among these make new 
sorts  of  interruption  seem  acceptable.  When  you  can  so  easily 
search for a fact or identity in just a few seconds, sometimes you 

       |        $   0   % ,  (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
might interrupt a  conversation to do  so  (hopefully not with the 
very  person  you  are  researching).  Smartphones  make  messages 
available  anyplace,  amid  any  activity.  It  is  not  so  unusual,  for 
example, to hear a business deal being negotiated  from the next 
toilet stall. Overconsumption comes not only from an increasing 
volume of communications, but also from an increasing disregard 
for context.

 , Q I R U P D W L R Q   R I  D  . L Q G
According to its historians, the word information did not come 
into  general  use  until  the  nineteenth century,  when  the  rise  of 
industrial  technologies  created  massive  amounts  of  printed 
matter  to  organize  and  store,  and  so  led  to  libraries,  catalogs, 
mass-produced  newspapers,  and  disembodied  telegraph  signaling.23  And  the  more  the  world  became  raw  material  to  be 
exploited,  the  less  it  seemed  to  inform  as  it  was.  Information 
became a thing to be stored and retrieved, and not just the process of gaining knowledge from data in a situation.24

Only  with  electronic  communications  did  the  word  information begin to correlate with mathematical encodings, such as 
the ones used by Western Union's telegraph transmitters. With 
the rise of cybernetics in the mid-twentieth century, the mathematical theory that has since been the dominant meaning of the 
word took form. Today, the word conveniently comprises both 
the data packets that travel down optical fibers and over the airwaves and the use that someone makes of those data packets.

To question the prevailing meaning of information quickly 
becomes an exercise in epistemology. Thus a widely cited argument by Michael Buckland holds that information can be a subjective process, an aspect of knowledge, or a thing (i.e., capable 

  ,   1   )   2   5   0 $  7  ,  2   1      |       
of being processed technologically): "Being `informative' is situational and it would be rash to state of any thing that it might 
not be informative, hence information, in some conceivable situation."25  After  all,  at  least  some  knowledge  comes  from  direct 
experience.  Only  modern  communications  technology  created 
an emphasis on sent packets of data. The point here is that the 
balance  has  shifted  away  from  tacit  knowledge  through  direct 
experience toward explicit but indirect knowledge through communications.  French  makes  this  epistemological  distinction  in 
its  verbs  connai^tre  (to  know  personally  through  acquaintance) 
and savoir (to know of, through learning.) 

According to the widely respected information ethicist and 
semanticist  Luciano  Floridi,  the  prevailing  mathematical  theories of information were really theories of data communication, 
that is, "uninterpreted symbols in well-formed strings of signals." 
Floridi  has  advanced  a  more  carefully  qualified  definition  of 
information: "true semantic content."26 With certain exceptions 
(such  as  sunrises),  being  informed  generally  involves  linguistically encoded meanings, at appropriate levels of abstraction, all 
made intelligible by frames of knowledge. Without these, transmissions that are meaningless or false may too easily be taken for 
information.

Once  you  assume  that  most  information  is  semantic,  you 
can more easily identify its opposite--nonsemantic information. 
For one self-evident example, light in the east informs without 
symbols. The dawn need not be a social construction. Philosophers  call  this  assumption  of  information  without  inscription 
the "realist thesis."

For example, bear tracks on a wilderness trail indicate that at 
least  one  bear  has  passed  that  way.  A  picture  of  these  tracks 

       |        $   0   % ,  (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
would be a document that you could store and retrieve, but the 
tracks  themselves  aren't  a  document.  Although  they  refer  to 
something not present, they do so without an agreed protocol or 
intended  communication,  and  without  human  agency.  A  raccoon could also tell that a bear had been by. Such nonsemantic 
information  takes  no  language  or  encoding.27  Linguists  call  it 
"natural meaning."28

Floridi calls nonsemantic information like animal tracks or 
sunrises  "immanent  data,"  where  "immanent"  means  that  the 
form or structure of some phenomenon is coupled to the state of 
another, so that form of one indicates state of the other, as fingerprints left at the scene of a theft indicate who were the thieves. 
Floridi  believes  such  immanent  data  should  be  understood  as 
"environmental information."29 In a  vivid textbook example  of 
environmental information, the rings of a tree stump reveal the 

      Intrinsic structure informs. The rings of a tree stump show its age. Photo: thousandShpz/FlickR.

  ,   1   )   2   5   0 $  7  ,  2   1      |       
tree's age when it was cut down (figure 2.2). Because the word 
environmental has so many other meanings, however, and a specific, different one later on here, this inquiry calls nonsemantic 
information such as fingerprints and tree rings "intrinsic information" instead.

 , Q W U L Q V L F  6 W U X F W X U H
"Intrinsic" means "inherent to the material, structure, or constitution of something." Intrinsic information exists mainly on the 
scale and in the form and configuration of learned surroundings. 
To speak of "embodied information" is to address the combination of mediated with intrinsic information (figure 2.3a).

Especially  through  their  embodiment,  persistent  structures 
and  recurring  patterns  provide  the  frameworks  by  which  to 
assimilate  new  or  changing  phenomena.  For  example,  when 
walking down a city block, you might notice that one house has 
a new fence, but only if you have walked that block often enough 
before. A notice on the fence might warn you to keep out, but 
the structure of the fence did so already, in a less mediated way.

With  intrinsic  information,  content  remains  inseparable 
from form. The effect of form, though not always a sign, can be 
experienced nonsemantically, through its embodiment. When a 
bike rack has been placed outside a cafe', you don't need instructional signage to park your bike there, nor a "This side up" label 
to  remind  you  how  to  park  it.  These  are  further  examples  of 
"natural meaning."

As  new  forms  of  packaged  information  arise,  in  ways  that 
reduce  cognitive  load  and  that  appeal  to  the  senses,  it  seems 
important  to  uphold  the  importance  of  the  intrinsic  structure, 
and  to  find  fascination  with  it.  The  unmediated  world  would 

       |        $   0   % ,  (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

      Loss of intrinsic information. (a) The ambient increases situated, mediated, and tangible kinds of information. (b) In an imaginable 
limit case, to be avoided, the unmediated, direct, and intrinsic kinds of information have been forgotten.

  D 
  E 

  ,   1   )   2   5   0 $  7  ,  2   1      |       
suffice as the ambient, but only to those whose culture provided 
ample experience with intrinsic information, as reflected in street 
sense  or  traditional  folklore.  Conversely,  a  totally  mediated 
world,  which  seems  to  be  where  much  urban  space  is  headed, 
would  also  suffice  as  the  ambient,  to  those  with  sufficiently 
fluent  access  to  the  pervading  media.  So  the  imaginable  limit 
case  of  the  ambient  would  exist  without  intrinsic  information 
(figure 2.3b).

To put it more plainly, intrinsic information seems increasingly at risk. Pervasive media could assume its form as a double, 
but in doing so might mask it. Technologically dependent sensibilities  become  less  inclined  to  notice  much  else.  To  mediaaddled  kids,  the  unmediated  world  is  boring.  They  simply 
haven't developed the cognitive capacity to appreciate it.

Traditional cultures' default emphasis on intrinsic information waned long before the rise of computer networks. Practical 
means  of  transportation  and  the  written  word  were  enough  to 
tip the balance. The first guidebooks and street signs of the early 
modern  city  provide  a  noteworthy  chapter  in  the  history  of 
information.  Print  and  electrification  also  augmented  the  city, 
but not so pervasively or seductively as information technologies 
now do. Never before have so many inscriptions so literally and 
figuratively  covered  so  much  of  the  city;  never  before  have 
inscriptions been quite so cognitively engineered. Never before 
have so many interfaces to otherwise unrelated processes been so 
similar. As a result, many everyday processes of reading, navigating, shopping, and socializing resemble one another more now 
than they did a  century ago, and  much more than they did in 
traditional  cultures.  As  an  unintended  consequence,  these  processes rely somewhat less on intrinsic information.30

       |        $   0   % ,  (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

As  another  way  to  understand  such  detachment,  consider 
intrinsic  information  in  relation  to  the  abundance  of  textual 
signs.  When  modernity  had  filled  so  much  of  the  world  with 
organized communications, unsurprisingly this led some philosophers to propose that everything communicates. Or, more specifically, to propose that the city as a built environment becomes 
a text, at least of a sort. Starting with the industrial age, cities not 
only  labeled  but  also  increasingly  shaped  and  organized  themselves according to deliberate schemas, such as street numbering, 
visitor  guidebooks,  corporate  identities,  advertised  attractions 
and so on.31 From this industrialized experience came theories of 
attention,  systematized  communications,  and  signs.  To  the 
American  pragmatist  Charles  Sanders  Peirce,  for  example,  the 
"semeiotic" (as he spelled it) embraced most other categories of 
his philosophy. A sign was anything some party devised to represent  something;  moreover,  it  was  nothing  without  interpretation.  This  approach  led  toward  a  more  general  theory  of 
signifiers,  generally  credited  to  the  early  twentieth-century  linguist Fernand de Saussure, who explained how the designation 
and  interpretation  of  signifiers  could  be  arbitrary,  that  is,  not 
necessarily  bound  to  intrinsic  features,  or  what  we  are  calling 
"intrinsic information." Rereading Saussure, late-twentieth-century critics saw free play of those signifiers in increasingly constructed  social  interpretations.  In  the  process,  especially  after 
Roland Barthes in the 1970s, semiotics became a catchword both 
for the situational and unintended aspects of cultural communications and for their critique. To this way of thinking, buildings 
themselves were mere signs, and the city was surely a text.32 But 
in the process, and perhaps due to cognitive theories of symbolic 
processing  that  were  emanating  from  computer  science  at  the 

  ,   1   )   2   5   0 $  7  ,  2   1      |       
time,  the  unconstructed,  unmediated  aspects  of  environments 
were forgotten.

Long  lost  by  then  were  Peirce's  qualifications  that  not  all 
aspects of an object signified, and that not all aspects of sign production referred to things. Underneath the free play of signifiers, 
an  unmediated  world  was  still  there,  one  that  worked  without 
need for encoded transmissions--and it wasn't a text.

 7 K H  ( O R T X H Q F H  R I  W K H  : R U O G
This  chapter  began  with  an  everyday  example  of  superfluous 
signage,  as  if  nobody  could  recognize  a  parking  lot  without 
instruction. That was one small instance of the consequences of 
modern  information  superabundance.  But  what  if  information 
technology becomes so complete that nothing remains to be discovered and documented? 33 Or, as the novelist Jose' Luis Borges 
asked  over  thirty  years  ago,  what  if  the  map  grows  larger  than 
the territory?34 When we know almost everything through documentation,  and  almost  nothing  directly,  will  any  of  us  notice 
that something is missing? And when we know everything only 
through  its  signs,  what  will  happen  when  the  signifiers  start 
playing  more  freely  and  their  referents  no  longer  refer  to  the 
things they once did? And, finally, what if the signifiers become 
reality  itself,  much  as  an  MP3  stream  is  casually  taken  for  the 
music itself, right there in your earpods, and not a recording of a 
musicians' session somewhere else?35

Many philosophers have voiced this challenge as one of balance.  Thus,  for  Albert  Borgmann,  "Righting  the  balance  of 
information and reality is the crucial task. It amounts to the restoration of eminent natural information."36 There is something 
to be lost. "The  task, it  would seem, is to commensurat[e] the 

       |        $   0   % ,  (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
fluidity of information technology with the stability of the things 
and practices that have served us well and we continue to depend 
on  for  the  material  and  spiritual  well-being--the  grandeur  of 
nature, the splendor of cities, the competence of work, fidelity to 
loved ones, and devotion to art or religion. What is needed is a 
sense for the liabilities of technical information, and an ear for 
the changing voices  of  traditional  reality."37 Floods  of  encoded 
information can drown out what Borgmann called "the unsurpassable eloquence of reality."38

Knowledge of the world makes life more sane and rewarding. 
Knowledge from acquaintance with enduring physical conditions 
provides a framework for other, more ephemeral ways of knowing. In language, for example, an intuition for the spatial relationships of physical objects grounds much metaphor, and metaphor 
enables  much  thought.  In  masterful  work,  known  relationships 
of tools, media, and processes allow creative responses to unforeseen situations where these relationships are present.

Information technology has clouded these principles because 
mediated cultural productions now appear with such high resolution, in so many different circumstances, that many more people 
take them as reality. The cultural experiences of video, navigation, 
data simulations, and social networks occur through increasingly 
rich media, under ever easier suspension of disbelief. The immediate gratifications of multitasking among such media tend to mask 
or preempt the slower mental states of appreciating the unmediated  world.  Many  more  people  have  grown  up  without  having 
gone outside to play as children, or without ever having chosen to 
get  lost  in  a  city  as  adults.  Some  send  email  instead  of  walking 
down  the  corridor  to  talk  to  a  colleague.  As  educators  often 
lament,  some  of  their  students  can't  always  tell  the  difference 

  ,   1   )   2   5   0 $  7  ,  2   1      |       
between fact and fiction, sample and simulation, or visualization 
and appearance. Some people still buy SUVs as surrogates for the 
cold,  messy  experience  of  ever  visiting  actual  mountains.  Some 
have spent more time in nature stores than outdoors.

"Information as reality" is how Borgmann put it. "Information can illuminate, transform, or displace reality."39 Now comes 
increased ethical challenge to keep these in balance. Information 
"about"  reality  describes  and  reveals.  Mythology,  poetry,  and 
geography also refer to the world as it is. Information "for" reality makes bold plans, and realizes them through the contingencies  of  the  physical  world.40  Contingency  seems  vital  to 
Borgmann's  argument,  which  makes  its  case  through  architecture. Thus the magnificence of a late medieval church comes not 
from  having  been  conceived  and  made  so  all  of  a  piece,  but 
instead from having been accreted and adapted over centuries, in 
different styles and constructions, all toward a persistent vision. 
"When  the  creative  power  of  humans  and  the  contingency  of 
reality are consummated in a great work, the latter has a presence 
more  commanding  or  expressive  than  that  of  a  text,  score,  or 
plan."41 The Latin root contingere connotes consummation more 
than circumstance. The enduring, situated doneness of the work 
gives it its power, especially for orientation and memory. Without contingency or permanence, and without enough difference 
between  things  that  are  made  and  signs  that  prescribe  them, 
information would not be "for" reality. Lacking these epistemological  anchors,  information  "as"  reality  can  be  anything  one 
moment, and something else the next.

To those who equate civilization with some sort of permanence,  and  to  those  who  lament  the  loss  of  environmental 
knowledge,  this  may  suggest  a  new  dark  age.42  Environmental 

       |        $   0   % ,  (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
advocate  Bill  McKibben  once  proclaimed  "the  age  of  missing 
information."43 Writing twenty years ago, long before YouTube 
or  Google,  McKibben  claimed  to  learn  more  from  a  day  on  a 
mountain in the Adirondacks than from watching a day's worth 
of  television,  which  his  friends  recorded  for  him  while  he  was 
out hiking. From an epistemological standpoint, it appears that 
McKibben  was  enjoying  information  about  the  world  through 
the  natural  meaning  of  things,  without  encoding  or  human 
agency. When he called this "information," that was in contrast 
to the usual technological sense of the word as something sent.

Alas,  in  many  disciplines  of  thought,  a  fundamental  break 
has  occurred  with  the  intrinsic  structure  of  the  world.  "If  we 
allow  having  information  to  obscure  the  difference  between 
direct and indirect knowledge," Borgmann cautioned, "our sense 
of  the  presence  of  things  will  become  obtuse."44  Whether  in 
finance,  art,  or  neuroscience,  mediation  has  a  presence  of  its 
own,  and  symbolic  processing  too  often  turns  away  from  the 
external referents of its operands toward some internal elegance 
of  its  algorithms.  As  a  result,  semantic  processing  has  become 
much  more  important  to  cognition  research  than  it  was  half  a 
century ago, when primary perception was the main topic. Neurolinguistic  information  processing  models  increasingly  dominate the discipline. In many ways this has made symbolic context 
more  important  than  physical  context.  And  because  seated, 
media-based tasks prove easier to test in controlled experiments 
than embodied environmental engagement tasks may ever be, it 
has  led  to  far  more  research  along  these  lines,  with  the  focus 
turned  from  embodied  social  behavior  (like  the  perception  of 
crowding)  to  divided  personal  attention.  When  it  seems  as  if 
everyone is staring at glowing rectangles, you tend to experiment 

  ,   1   )   2   5   0 $  7  ,  2   1      |       
using  those  rectangles.  Here,  too,  something  may  have  gone 
missing.  If  humans  have  a  propensity  for  tacit  environmental 
knowledge, the cognitive neuroscience disciplines ought to find 
more to say about that.45

In sum, the ambient raises a knowledge challenge. As media 
become  peripheral  and  less  cognitively  demanding,  do  they 
become  more  environmental?  Do  ambient  media  eclipse  or 
enhance awareness of intrinsic phenomena? Somehow the role of 
tacit  knowledge  of  embodied  space  has  been  underestimated. 
How that knowledge becomes the basis for larger, more abstract 
mental  models  of  the  world  is  just  one  aspect  of  the  problem. 
There is a more basic disregard for settings, which only feeds the 
belief that "the environment" is somewhere else and hard to do 
anything about. When almost everybody is disconnected, almost 
nobody will notice that something is missing. It must be an epistemological oversimplification to say this, but people don't even 
know that they don't know, say, for whom the streets have been 
named, the name of any tributary to their local river, which vegetation  is  native, the  prevailing  wind directions,  or what phase 
the moon is in. And, on the rare occasion of a lunar eclipse, you 
could suggest to a digital native that this might really be worth 
checking  out,  only  to  get  a  response  of  "Oh  .  .  .  ,  cool  .  .  .  , 
where?"46

       |        $   0   % ,  (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

        , 1 ) 2 5 0 $ 7 , 2 1
   0 D L Q  L G H D       1 R W  D O O  L Q I R U P D W L R Q  L V  V H Q W   W K H  Z R U O G  L W V H O I  D O V R  
     L Q I R U P V

   & R X Q W H U D U J X P H Q W       6 H P D Q W L F  W K H R U L H V  R I  N Q R Z O H G J H
   . H \  W H U P V       2 Y H U F R Q V X P S W L R Q   L Q W U L Q V L F  L Q I R U P D W L R Q
   : K D W  K D V  F K D Q J H G     ' H I L Q L W L R Q V  R I  L Q I R U P D W L R Q
   & D W D O \ V W       6 X S H U D E X Q G D Q F H
   5 H O D W H G  I L H O G       ( S L V W H P R O R J \
   2 S H Q  G H E D W H     + R Z  W R  S X W  Y D O X H  R Q  L Q W U L Q V L F  L Q I R U P D W L R Q "

 

 
 $ W W H Q W L R Q

As attention grows scarce in this age of superabundant information, now might be an excellent time to learn more about it.1 

You might first think of attention as a kind of focus. Even if 
you turn off all your screens, focus is hard to sustain. Thoughts 
dance  about  like  a  flame.  Words  turn  into  language  games. 
Vision naturally drifts, as a means of alertness. Incidental properties such as texture stand in for more essential ones, and they 
help memory make lateral associations. Perception of course lets 
only  a  few  stimuli  through,  and  many  of  those  automatically. 
Not all attention involves thought. 

You  may  have  learned  as  a  child  that  attention  was  something  to  pay.  Later  on,  you  also  learned  how  attention  could 
flow, or be divided, or be carefully conserved. Business practices 
such as slide shows assume that you aren't going to pay attention 
unless you have to. Recreations restore attention through flow. 
Entertainments divert and divide attention, often by triggering 
deeper, more automatic responses, to bright moving objects, say, 

       |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
or to sudden loud noises or slow zoom-in shots of food. Thus, 
besides  being  something  to  pay,  attention  can  be  involuntarily 
stolen,  consciously  fragmented,  or  effortlessly  restored.  So  you 
might take issue with James's aphorism "Everyone knows what 
attention  is."2  You  might  wonder  just  what  it  is  that  can  be 
divided so acceptably, appealed to so relentlessly, or dissociated 
from physical context so universally by today's communication 
media (figure 3.1). 

      Divided attention at street level. Cartoon by James Sturm.

  $   7   7   (   1   7   ,   2   1      |       
 ' L Y L G H G  $ W W H Q W L R Q
Although  the  human  mind  naturally  tends  to  wander,  never 
before has it had such abundant means for doing so.3 This is an 
age of unprecedented distraction.

As a habit of mind, distraction may not have changed much 
over the ages. To reach it still takes no more technology than a 
jug  of  wine  or  a  pair  of  dice.  But  as  a  cultural  project,  and  a 
major industry, distraction seems much more recent. Although 
any  culture  had  its  entertainments,  none  before  had  so  many 
technologies for filling so many gaps in time or space with them. 
Whenever tyrants and theocrats had sought total control of communications in a society, the scope of their efforts was limited. 
Nothing has succeeded quite like modern consumerism at saturating life with its messages.

Today it seems difficult to imagine that, until the last century, most settings of everyday life remained beyond the reach of 
communication media most of the time. Even the most actively 
engaged  citizens  spent  much  of  their  day  away  from  media. 
Modernity was in essence a shift beyond that; and of all modern 
technological  advances,  electronic  communication  may  have 
brought the most change. Electrification introduced many more 
frequent  forms  of  connection  with  infrastructures.  It  created 
new  technical  delights,  indeed  a  new  discipline  of  industrial 
design, and brought many of these into the home (figure 3.2). 

It helps to remember that only with the advent of the Internet did two-way communication become inexpensive enough to 
be always on, however. Only then did communication become 
asynchronous,  many  to  many,  visually  modifiable,  attachment 
laden. And only in the last decade did Internet connectivity get 
worn,  carried  about,  and  embedded  into  things  not  normally 

       |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

      The modern increase of technological interfaces 
in the home: setting a watch by radio, 1925. 
Photo: Phyllis Frederick (Schlesinger Library, 
Harvard).

perceived  as  communication  devices.  And  embedded  into  life: 
today,  just  about  anything  human  beings  do  has  been  done 
while texting.4

Of  course,  the  appealing  ease  of  today's  information  technology  encourages  multitasking.  Formerly  quite  distinct  activities such as work, play, and  shopping now not  only appear on 
the  same  device,  but  also  share  the  use  of  similar  symbolic 
manipulators. In using these, many operations can become automatic  enough.5  Skills  acquired  from  one  kind  of  task  transfer 
and  indeed  lead  to  others.  This  creates  pleasure  in  itself,  from 
just how many kinds of things you can do with a few acquired 
interface skills. Full of useful tools, instantaneous references, personal  configurations,  and  curated  finds,  the  smartphone  itself 

  $   7   7   (   1   7   ,   2   1      |       
has become an object of status and desire, to be used for the sake 
of its usability.

Many people associate divided attention with the workplace. 
Among  the  contexts  of  technology  use,  the  workplace  most 
inherently provides interruptions, interrupted by other interruptions--many not by coworkers but self-initiated. At work, multitasking lets you coordinate concurrent activities, research facts 
on the fly, switch tasks when you are no longer fresh on the current  one, and  feel the comfort of  moving  things in and  out of 
focal attention. 

At  home,  divided  attention  lets you  relax  with  as many  of 
your personal media selections as you care to enjoy at once or in 
alternation. It seems almost a cancellation process: a retreat from 
an annoying set of glowing rectangles at work to a soothing set 
of  glowing  rectangles  at  home.  There  might  be  advantages  to 
unplugging  altogether  for  a  while,  but  people  seem  to  put  a 
higher priority on regaining control of their media first.

Under these diversifying technological circumstances, attention moves about more readily. It is easy, for example, to interleave  reading  a  book  electronically  with  chat,  social  networks, 
shopping,  a  movie,  grazing  at  news  feeds,  or  perhaps  writing 
something of your own. There can be pleasure in mixing activities when some are physical and others mental but not too challenging,  like  listening  to  music  while  running.  Concentration 
can be difficult, and multitasking can be a form of relief.

Increased social connectivity brings increased "fear of missing  out"  (FOMO),  which,  in  a  self-propagating  loop,  leads  to 
ever more messages of ever less substance. As eminent social psychologist  Sherry  Turkle  has  cautioned,  connectivity  can  reach 
the point where people mostly opt for communication formats 

       |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
(such  as  texting)  that  allow  them  to  divide  or  defer  attention, 
even to friends, even those present.6 To monitor so many feeds 
so  continuously  takes  what  design  strategist  Linda  Stone  has 
named  "continuous  partial  attention,"7  a  wider,  more  reactive 
alertness  than  multitasking,  which  emphasizes  only  a  few  concurrent actions. Though not solely social, such attention is motivated  by  FOMO.  People  do  less  in  order  to  remain  aware  of 
more. "In the case of continuous partial attention, we're motivated  by  a  desire  not  to  miss  anything.  There's  a  kind  of  vigilance  that  is  not  characteristic  of  multi-tasking,"  Stone  has 
explained. Usually in everyday multitasking, at least one of the 
activities being multitasked is "somewhat automatic, like eating 
lunch or stirring soup. That activity can be paired with another 
activity that's automatic with an activity that requires more cognitive resources, like writing an email or talking on the phone."8 
Continuous  partial  attention  is  instead  the  desire  to  monitor 
many things at once, in case one of them should do something 
interesting.

Naturally, there are limits to how many distinct things you 
can  keep  your  focus  on.  It  doesn't  take  a  neuroscience  lab  to 
demonstrate  this.  A  simple  exhibit  at  San  Francisco's  famed 
Exploratorium  shows  just  how  few.  It  will  ask  you  to  watch  a 
blue square among some dozen green ones as they all move about 
the screen, until the blue square turns green and seems to disappear among the other green squares. Then, a few seconds later, it 
will ask you to identify which of the squares was once blue. This 
is a trivial task with one blue square, can readily be done with two 
or three, so the exhibit will explain, and is already quite difficult 
with four or five, as you will see if you try to do so yourself. Yet, 
in  a  world  of  ever  more  chosen  friends,  feeds,  and  deliberative 

  $   7   7   (   1   7   ,   2   1      |       
duties--far more than four or five--people still try to avoid missing something. As Stone has observed: "Information overload. I 
don't think so. Blaming the information doesn't help us one bit. 
Information overconsumption. That gets us to the heart of it."9

Outcry over divided attention of any sort has generally been 
escalating. Public safety officials and legislators bewail mounting 
evidence  on  the  dangers  of  texting  while  driving.  Educators 
deplore  the  distracting  effects  of  background  media  on  gradeschoolers trying to do their homework. The children should be 
in a room without television, standard assignment sheets stress, 
with the all too justified implication that, most of time, in the 
homes of most children, somewhere a television is on. Personal 
productivity management gurus do a big business telling entrepreneurs not to do everything at once, and to limit multitasking 
to situations where there are true benefits of concurrency. Neuroscientists explain that, especially for more complex tasks, true 
multitasking  is  a  myth.  Incidentally  they  also  admit  that  environment  has  received  too  little  research  attention,  especially 
since it has become much more layered in media.

 % H \ R Q G  W K H  6 S R W O L J K W
Many popular notions of attention exist, as overloaded achievers 
have  discovered  through  the  work  practices,  meditations,  and 
social  networks  they  have  improvised  to  survive.  One  reason 
attention  remains  such  a  wondrous  but  unwieldy  topic  is  that 
there are so many ways to describe it. Any quick online foraging 
quickly  brings  a  cascade  of  views:  educators,  highly  specialized 
neurophysiology research, Silicon Valley ethnographers, eponymous college courses in psychology, new age personal transformation therapies, or the pioneering opus of William James.

       |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

Since attention so often feels divided, perhaps its most widespread  popular measure  is  "attention span":  the length of  time 
you can maintain deliberative focus on something in particular. 
Yet  that  expression  seldom  dominates  research  literature  and, 
even  then,  means  something  else  anyway.  In  a  world  full  of 
interruptions, there is ample mention of involuntary, automatic, 
or  reflexive  attention.  And  there  is  also  attention  restoration. 
Since so many of us wish to protect ourselves against attention 
theft, there is ample interest in attention control. This coincides 
with beliefs that attention is something you direct, which in turn 
coincides  with  how  your  gaze  moves  about.  And,  for  those 
beliefs, one most popular metaphor is the spotlight.

William James (figure 3.3) famously described attention as 
focus and periphery. "The faculty of voluntarily bringing back a 
wandering attention, over and over again," he wrote, "is the very 
root  of  judgment,  character,  and  will."10  Modern  experimental 
psychology has emphasized movements of the eyes (which readily lend themselves to study). The cultural phenomena of things 
competing to catch your eye make location important, whether 
on the street or on a screen. The gaze does tend to indicate where 
attention  is.  Therefore  perhaps  the  single  most  widely  used 
adjective for attention is selective. In one of his most cited passages, James wrote: "Millions of items of the outward order are 
present to my senses which never properly enter into my experience. Why? Because they have no interest for me. My experience is 
what I agree to attend to. Only those items which I notice shape 
my  mind--without  selective  interest,  experience  is  an  utter 
chaos."11 This implies that selective focus is voluntary, that it can 
be maintained, filtered, and owned.

  $   7   7   (   1   7   ,   2   1      |       
But then the eye roves. Wherever vision is focused, it processes the vicinity for where to focus next. At the least-processed 
level  of  data  gathering,  some  parts  of  the  retina  (called  the 
foveae) are more acutely resolved than others. This makes spatial 
proximity important. In visual identification tasks, that staple of 
controllable  laboratory-based  studies,  response  proves  faster 
when the target appears closer to the cued center of visual focus. 
Although  the  instinct  to  notice  a  shiny  object  in  the  extreme 
periphery of the visual field is more often described, the eye continuously processes stimuli close by before moving its center of 
focus to any one of them, let alone to one more distant.

      William James, in the famous photograph 
by Mrs. Montgomery Sears, ca. 1895 
(Houghton Library, Harvard).

       |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

The  wandering  eye  illustrates  the  incremental  reach  so 
essential  to  attention.  As  sociology  journalist  Maggie  Jackson 
noted  in  her  widely  read  2009  book,  Distraction,  "The  word 
[attention] is rooted in the Latin words ad and tendere, meaning 
to stretch toward, implying effort and intention [Oxford English 
Dictionary].  Even  the  phrase  "attention  span"  literally  means  a 
kind  of  bridge,  a  reaching  across  to  widen  one's  horizons."12 
There  is  something  about  switching  focus,  perhaps  especially 
visual focus, that instinctively satisfies. Something TV producers 
and  advertisers  know  best  of  all.  Or,  in  Jackson's  words:  "The 
quick cuts and rapid imagery [of television] are designed to keep 
tugging at our natural inclination to orient toward the shiny, the 
bright, and the mobile--whatever's eye-catching in our environment. It's ingenious: entertainment that hooks us by appealing 
to our very instincts for survival."13

Extensive  research  into  what  catches  the  eye  has  made  the 
study of selective attention into the study of reactions to visual 
events.  The mechanisms of  vision  include zooming  in and  out 
like a camera, as well as panning like a spotlight. But, of course, 
the eye  isn't  a camera;  vision  assembles  meanings  from stimuli 
by using processes such as production rules, pattern completion, 
and abstract mental schemas. The workings of attention resemble a series of gateways and building blocks more than they do a 
spotlight. Although your gaze usually indicates where your deliberative attention has been directed, it tells us nothing about how 
your attention has been assembled, or its aspects of orientation 
and habit. To explore these areas, current cognitive research has 
moved  beyond  the  spotlight  metaphor  to  the  role  of  embodiment in attention.14

  $   7   7   (   1   7   ,   2   1      |       
 $ Q  $ P D W H X U · V  1 H X U R V F L H Q F H
You don't have to be a neuroscientist to want a deeper grasp of 
attention these days. The need for nonspecialists to make their 
own  sense  of  scientific  research  on attention  these  days is  only 
increasing. With the benefit of more time, guidance, and database access than another might summon, this inquiry offers an 
amateur but hopefully not just anecdotal path through this field. 
There  has  to  be  a  way  to  do  so  without  falling  into  simplistic 
universal claims (sometimes known as "neurobabble") how the 
workings  of  the  brain  clearly  cause  "us"  to  behave  this  way  or 
that. There also has to be a way to inquire into attention without just coming away with more overload.

As a way to shape an overview, consider the idea of a mental 
hierarchy, from senses, to perception, to cognition, to execution, 
to consciousness. Much of what occurs at the lower levels of this 
hierarchy never reaches the higher ones. The senses work in parallel, wondrously so, but this parallelism doesn't rise all the way 
through the hierarchy.15 Instead, it encounters what earlier psychologists  such as  Donald Broadbent called "filtering"  or what 
more  recent  cognitive  scientists  prefer  to  call  "bottlenecks." 
More than the lower mechanics of perception or the higher constructs of belief, however, the middle levels of this mental hierarchy  appear  to  interest  research  specialists  most.  It  is  here  that 
sensations  are  converted  into  recognition,  recognition  into 
action, and action into conscious control, and it is here that cognitive scientists have made considerable advances. They can now 
model how neurological networks construct thoughts from perceptions,  and  how  representational  schemas  such  as  language 
govern those constructs.

       |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

Next, cross the idea of a mental hierarchy with a diversity of 
purpose. Attention plays many roles. Although cultural concerns 
about distraction often equate attention with task management, 
and  early  psychological  research often  tested  attention  through 
behavior,  obviously  there  are  aspects  of  orientation  and  intent 
that  neither  task  management  nor  behavior  addresses.  The 
intrinsic structure of the world may influence these in ways not 
often researched even now, as if being in the world is less a task 
than an attitude.

To  explain  the  diversity  of  attention's  purposes,  and  to 
understand  how  these  differ  in  their  demands  on  the  mental 
hierarchy,  consider  three  physiological  networks  for  "alerting, 
orienting, and executing."16 These were identified forty years ago 
by Michael Posner, who has since remained a leader in bringing 
neuroscience to a broader audience. After interviews with Posner 
for  her  book  Distraction,  Maggie  Jackson  described  the  three 
networks metaphorically:

Orienting  is  akin  to  a  cognitive  mouth,  a  gateway  to  our 
perception,  the  scout.! .! .! .  Alerting  is  the  gatekeeper  network,  the  caretaker  who  turns  the  lights  on  and  off  and 
keeps the hearth fires burning in our cerebral house. Simply 
put, alerting is wakefulness, the cornerstone of sensibility to 
our surroundings.!.!.!. The executive network is our troubleshooter, a sheriff who moonlights as the judge, with a long 
reach and a heady power that is, alas, easily corrupted.17

As Posner's work has demonstrated, each of these networks 
has its own pathways in the brain, and much about those pathways  develops  with  experience,  not  just  during  childhood  but 
throughout  life.  Such  adaptability  invites  notions  of  "digital 

  $   7   7   (   1   7   ,   2   1      |       
natives." Yet, even though attention skills do differ among individuals and across generations, as Posner has emphasized, many 
of  these  neurophysiological  adaptations  are  culturally  and  linguistically based.18

In  any  case,  the  three  different  attentional  networks  make 
different demands on the mental hierarchy. Most likely to consume resources in switching tasks and most subject to direction 
by  effort,  the  executive  network  does  the  least  in  parallel.19 
Directed executive focus is perhaps the kind of focus meant by 
"paying attention." It is also the most easily diverted. For example, the executive network often takes the props and cues of one 
task as reminders of another. At a physiological level, portions of 
the  network's  pathways  get  reused.  This  can  be  for  tasks  as 
simple as a play on words or as complex as associative reasoning 
in creative work. Quite often, some nonessential quality such as 
a  name  or  a  color  provides  the  transition  point.  Wherever  an 
element  of  the  current  object  of  attention  also  has  meaning  in 
another nearby conceptual context, the temptation arises to shift 
to that one. Plays on words do this, for instance. 

Yet  those  who  derive  pleasure  from keeping  watch  over  as 
many  potentially  interesting  feeds  as possible  can mistake  vigilance for execution. As research suggests, less can become truly 
automatic within the executive than within attention's other two 
physiological networks. It also suggests limits to just how wide a 
range you can monitor, especially without missing some stimuli.

Some would argue that nothing is salient. There is a famous 
experiment  in  which  subjects  busy  counting  one  thing  miss 
another. Watching a video while two teams, one dressed in white 
and  the  other  in  black,  each  separately  passed  basketballs  among 
themselves, subjects were asked to count the number of passes by 

       |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
the team in white. Halfway through the video, someone dressed in 
a black gorilla suit also walked across the court. This was blatantly 
obvious, except to those subjects watching the team in white. Busy 
counting that team's passes, only about half noticed the gorilla suit. 
Researchers  Christopher  Chabris  and  Daniel  Simon  called  this 
zero-sum  effect  "inattentional  blindness."  The  "invisible  gorilla" 
became a meme for how no one really knows what attention is.20

Almost  everyone  can  recognize  the  importance  of  expectations, however. You see what you seek. For evidence that cognitive production relates lower scales of perception to higher scales 
of  intention,  experiments  emphasize  cuing.  In  the  famous 
"Posner  test,"  response  time  in  recognizing  a  known  shape 
improves "when [subjects are] first told approximately where it 
will  appear."21  Similarly,  your  response  to  recognizing  the 
appearance of a shape is quicker when you know what shape to 
expect.  You  will  generally  see  what  you  are  looking  for  more 
quickly  than something  you  aren't. Psychologists  call  this phenomenon, as generalized among all modes of perception, "priming" or "attentional set."22 Expectations allocate resources toward 
a particular kind of filtering.

 5 H V R X U F H  $ O O R F D W L R Q
Thus there are very real limits to selective attention. And there 
are very real advantages to orientation. But if you were to keep 
just one cognitive science idea in support of better practices of 
attention, it would be "resource allocation."

What  cognitive  scientists  call  "resources"  are  for  the  most 
part brain pathways. At the lower levels of the mental hierarchy, 
they provide perception. At higher levels, they represent knowledge, which has long surpassed perception as the main topic of 

  $   7   7   (   1   7   ,   2   1      |       
cognitive  research.  Mental  models,  schemas,  goals,  and  plans 
extend the notion of attentional set. They apply especially well, 
and are especially convenient to test, for experiments using work 
tasks  on foreground technologies, such  as clicking on a screen. 
From a generation of such experiments, cognitive neuroscientists 
now  understand  much  more  about  the  physiological  basis  of 
knowledge,  whose  representations  apply  adaptive  networks  of 
brain pathways in modular recombinations for a variety of purposes.  Especially  at  higher  levels,  these  representations  operate 
on streams of symbols; in effect, there is a language of thought. 
Indeed, cognition research has, for the most part, grown up by 
emphasizing how the brain processes symbolic representations.

Where resources apply to attention, their most obvious role 
is as gatekeeper. (Here one famous metaphor was Aldous Huxley's "doors of perception.") Each level in the attentional hierarchy  lets  some  stimuli  through  but  keeps  most  others  out,  all 
according to rules and receptivities set by still higher levels. Here 
it  helps  to  imagine  what  cognitive  scientists  call  a  "perceptual 
store": accumulations of data from the senses. Vision, for example, works from highly fragmented sensory inputs to build identities of objects, spaces, and patterns.23 To accomplish this may 
involve  buffering,  delaying,  or  comparing  different  streams  of 
sensory  data, as  well as  invoking  higher representations for  the 
pursuit of patterns in these streams. This is where filtering and 
resource allocation become complementary.

Consider  a  specific  instance  of  this  assembly  process.  For 
even the most basic steps beyond the perceptual store, production-rule resources aren't infinite. Thus vision begins with color, 
extent, and position as quite separate perceptions, and only later, 
through  what  neuroscientists  call  "feature  integration,"  sees 

       |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
shapes  among  them.  In  Anne  Treisman's  famous  experiments 
with reading, the T character took subjects half as long to identify in a field of I and Y characters as it did in a field of I and Z 
characters,  T's  horizontal  stroke  being  more  easily  recognized 
when it was the only one present. Despite how automatic reading becomes, the T character is still first seen as separate pieces 
and only later, through  resource allocation and following  what 
vision scientists call "production rules," becomes a T.24

The  coupling  of  filtering  and  resource  allocation  naturally 
varies from one mode of perception to the next--and from one 
kind of activity to the next. Take motor activities. More of these 
can  function  automatically  in  parallel  than  activities  of  other 
kinds.  You  can  walk  and  chew  gum,  run  and  throw  a  ball,  or 
perform  any  number  of  other  motor  activities  in  pairs  at  the 
same time. Yet, even here, some gatekeeping can occur, as when 
actions compete for some higher systemic resource, such as control  of  your  hands.25  This  makes  it  hard  to  keep  patting  your 
head  while  also  rubbing  your  stomach.  Likewise,  it  is  hard  to 
make  sense  of  two  people  speaking  to  you  at  once,  especially 
with each speaking in a different ear. If asked what you were just 
told under such conditions, you are likely to conflate pieces of 
what the two just said.

Bottlenecks occur where the brain must exchange one cued 
attention  set  for  another.  Switching  among  different  modes, 
streams, and buffers of perception in itself requires resources. As 
explained  by  David  Meyer,  perhaps  the  best-known  experimenter on switching costs, the brain takes time to change goals, 
to reload the rules needed for the new task, and to reset perceptual  filters.  Switching  incurs  costs  all  across  the  hierarchy  of 
attention,  but  especially  at  the  higher  levels,  which  involve 

  $   7   7   (   1   7   ,   2   1      |       
greater use of the executive network. Thus the more complex the 
tasks, the steeper the switching costs.26

Therefore,  as  Meyer  famously  asserts,  multitasking  in  any 
meaningful sense simply doesn't exist. Switching entails lags and 
inefficiencies, not on the timescale of the tasks themselves (which 
would halt them), but in fractions of seconds, whose effects are 
cumulative.  Awareness  of  these  deficits  is  effectively  lost,  however,  in  the  perceptual  and  experiential  pleasures  of  changing 
focus. All that fast switching can feel quite good, and can be mistaken for true multitasking.  Meyer summarizes that "multitasking is for fun," not for actually getting things done.27

In a  widely cited study  from Stanford, researchers demonstrated the reality of switching costs. Surprisingly, and contrary 
to the usual arguments for habituation, "heavy media multitaskers" performed more poorly than other subjects on a set of test 
switching  tasks.  They  were  found  to  be  "more  susceptible  to 
interference  from  irrelevant  environmental  stimuli  and  from 
irrelevant representations in memory."28

This  finding  runs  counter  to  the  digital  natives'  argument 
that whatever you do most you will do best. Although the science  may  not  yet  be  developed  enough  to  show  just  where, 
clearly there are limits to cognitive adaptation. The brain cannot 
be made into just anything; it doesn't just become what it consumes.29 In one of the wisest recent essays on what is commonly 
referred  to  as  "neuroplasticity,"  linguist  and  cognitive  scientist 
Steven Pinker wrote: "Yes, every time we learn a fact or skill, the 
wiring  of  the  brain  changes;  it's  not  as  if  the  information  is 
stored  in  the  pancreas.  But  the  existence  of  neural  plasticity 
doesn't mean the brain is a blob of clay pounded into shape by 
experience."30

       |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

Instead,  neuroplasticity  means  that  habits  and  tools  of 
engagement  matter  more  than  was  previously  understood. 
Anyone  with  a  studio  practice  might  understand  how  context 
suggests intent. This is why yoga teachers advise setting aside a 
particular corner  of the house for meditation. This is why it is 
hard to cook in somebody else's kitchen. Researchers have shown 
that even a simple habit like reading the news can be disrupted 
by  a  removal  from  usual  circumstance;  when  you  move  to 
another city, your routines may settle in differently.31 Acquiring 
habits  includes  links  with  context,  not  only  with  objects  used 
but also with incidental qualities of sound and light where you 
stand  or  sit.  The  brain  constructs  correlations  through  metaphors  in  the  course  of  direct  physical  experience  and,  at  a  less 
linguistic level, through links with the properties and usable relationships of things in habitual, stable physical contexts. Contrary 
to the digital natives' argument, disembodied digital media provide  too  few  such  properties  to  construct  useful  correlations. 
And  because  sensibility  alters  experience,  mindless  overconsumption may, if anything, do more damage than good. This is 
not to say that technology eventually makes you stupid or smart, 
although it may amplify some of your temporary mental states. 
Hence  the  neuroplasticity  movement  emphasizes  perpetual 
learning  through  mindful,  habitual,  skillful,  situated  practices. 
Recent  findings  in  neuroscience  tend  to  support  the  old  adage 
among artisans that what you are really working on is yourself.

 . Q R Z O H G J H  5 H S U H V H Q W D W L R Q V
One reason why attention has fascinated philosophers, psychologists, and cognitive scientists is because it depends so much on 
knowledge. Not all the workings of attention rise to the level of 

  $   7   7   (   1   7   ,   2   1      |       
conscious  thought,  however.  Which  ones  do  so  seems  to  vary; 
this  makes  attention  seem  more  selective  than  it  actually  is. 
Much  of  the  knowledge  used  in  attention  is  unconsciously 
learned, unnamed, and unintended. More remarkably, much of 
the knowledge used in attention does not take the form of symbolic processing structures,  which seem  to be the core  topic of 
cognitive  science.  Indeed,  tacit,  action-based,  and  externalized 
forms of knowledge contribute more to attention than they do 
to most other functions of the mind.

A great deal of knowledge is inarticulable, especially when in 
use.  In  music,  sports,  or  many  another  expertise,  you  can  do 
things you cannot explain. Tacit knowledge also occurs implicitly 
in  organizations  and  in  social  relationships:  at  a  workplace,  a 
cocktail  party,  or  the  corner  office,  for  example.32  In  a  classic 
argument against the mid-twentieth-century positivist impetus to 
proceduralize  everything,  philosopher-chemist  Michael  Polanyi 
showed  how  tacit  knowledge  exists not  only  in  music  or  sports 
but also in scientific research and organizational memory.33 Thus 
business  and organizational  studies  emphasize  the  value  of  tacit 
knowledge  held  by  communities  of  practice.  They  find  that 
experts  don't  so  much  follow  rules  as  they  play  situations--the 
contingent configuration of tools, props, co-present players, and 
built-in cues and protocols for operation--as a way to bring their 
environment to attention. For an instance of props, having a prototype on the table shapes what its designers are likely to say. The 
physicist  Richard  Feynman  once  explained  that  his  notes  were 
not  a  "record"  of  his  thought  but  one  of  its  components:  the 
work occurred on paper and not just in his head.34 

Recent  findings  in  neuroscience  suggest  that  tools,  props, 
and settings contribute far more actively to far more tacit forms 

       |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
of knowledge than mainstream cognitive science once understood 
them  to  do.  These  findings  bring  research  back  into  alignment 
with  earlier,  precomputational  interpretations  of  attention.  For 
example,  the  early  nineteenth-century  psychologists'  affinity  for 
images  now  makes  more  sense.  In  much  the  same  way  as  language  constructs,  highly  resonant  images  may  serve  as  anchors 
and building blocks for knowledge states. Art critic Barbara Maria 
Stafford called this "form as figuring it out" in her 2007 study of 
"the  cognitive  work  of  images."35  Form  assists  the  speculative 
imagination, of how different things might be. Art helps assimilate  abundant  novel  stimuli.  The  resonance  of  certain  images 
helps explain some "interpretive blanks in the picture of how the 
mind works."36 Neither language alone nor any form of symbolic 
processing  completely  explains  how  mental  models  develop. 
Because  affect  and  perception  interrelate,  works  that  move  the 
emotions  also  help  coalesce  mental  models.  And  by  means  of 
such  phenomena,  many  neurological  processes  operate  before 
language does or without rising to the level of deliberation.

This new stage in the cognitive disciplines strongly affirms 
activity-based  approaches  to  interaction  design.  Those  justify 
continued interest in the configurations of sites of habitual activity.  This  raises  questions  about  the  role  of  embodied  information in the ambient. In light of researchers' renewed appreciation 
of context in the workings of attention, this inquiry next turns 
from attention itself to its embodiment in physical contexts, and 
then to the role of built contexts. Here the insights of early, precomputational psychologists seem well worth recalling. William 
James, John Dewey, and  Lev Vygotsky all were quick to point 
out that people often act before noticing that they are doing so, 
and without consciousness of rules or names, as if nothing shapes 

  $   7   7   (   1   7   ,   2   1      |       
attention more than the habits and situations of mastery. Or, as 
James famously put it: "The marksman sees the bird, and, before 
he knows it, he has aimed and shot."37

       $ 7 7 ( 1 7 , 2 1
   0 D L Q  L G H D       0 D Q \  N L Q G V  R I  D W W H Q W L R Q   Q R W  D O O  I R U H J U R X Q G  
     G H O L E H U D W L Y H  I R F X V

   & R X Q W H U D U J X P H Q W     6 H O H F W L Y H  D W W H Q W L R Q
   . H \  W H U P V     5 H V R X U F H  D O O R F D W L R Q   D G D S W D W L R Q
   : K D W  K D V  F K D Q J H G     & R J Q L W L Y H  V F L H Q F H  R I  D W W H Q W L R Q
   & D W D O \ V W    & R V W V  R I  P X O W L W D V N L Q J
   5 H O D W H G  I L H O G     & R J Q L W L Y H  Q H X U R V F L H Q F H
   2 S H Q  G H E D W H     ' L J L W D O  Q D W L Y H V "

 

 
 ( P E R G L P H Q W

To  thinkers  of  any  era,  at  least  in  the  West,  the  world  has 
seemed manifest; it has assumed its form. How does that condition shape information and attention? It is through embodiment 
that many themes of this inquiry arise.1 

What,  for  example,  is  the  role  of  embodiment  in  tacit 
knowledge? How does tacit knowledge provide a sense of flow, 
in which attention becomes effortless? How do embodied skills 
depend on the features of their settings? And how does engaged 
action use features of context as building blocks for knowledge 
representations? Such questions turn on a paradigm shift in cognitive  science,  which  is  generally  known  as  embodied  cognition. 
Its  basic  idea  seems  simple  enough.  Philosopher  and  cognitive 
scientist  Andy  Clark  and  fellow  philosopher  David  Chalmers 
call it "the extended mind" or, perhaps more usefully for present 
purposes, "extended cognition."2 The word "extended" indicates 
engaged  action  making  use  of  external  circumstances,  which 
cognition  uses  much  like  knowledge  representations.  Activity 

       |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
theorists have understood this since the mid-twentieth century; 
cognitive  scientists  began  to  confirm it  in  the  1990s.  As  Clark 
summarized then, engaged action occurs in "memory as pattern 
re-creation instead of data retrieval; problem solving as pattern 
completion  and  transformation;  the  environment  as  an  active 
resource, and not just a domain problem; and the body as part of 
the computational loop, and not just an input device."3

You aren't your brain.4 Although some have called cognitive 
science's shift in research focus from the disembodied mind  to 
active embodied use of external contexts (figure 4.1) a "revolution," if you always found purely computational models of mind 
somewhat suspect, you might sooner call it a "correction."

 ( Q J D J H G  $ F W L R Q
A  first  look  at  the  workings  of  attention  quickly  revealed  the 
importance of knowledge representations in resource allocation. 
Neither  those  representations  nor  the  allocation  can  always  be 
conscious and willful. Attention is not just what you choose to 
attend to.

To resume the inquiry where it left off on tacit knowledge, 
turn  now  to  the  question  of  engagement.  In  a  philosophical 
approach to engaged action generally known as "activity theory," 
there is a rich legacy of work on tacit knowledge. Many an interaction  designer  has  considered  this.  Since  the  1980s,  activity 
theory has helped to move computing beyond the command line 
to  the  graphical  user  interface  and  thus  into  the  simple  work 
tasks  of  millions  of  nonspecialists.  It  has  also  helped  to  move 
interaction design beyond isolated explicit tasks to a richer relation  of  subject,  objects,  intentions,  and  contexts  and,  in  doing 
so,  to  advance  interfaces  beyond  the  desktop  into  sites  and 

  (   0   %   2   '   ,   0 (  1   7      |       
      From representational to embodied models of mind: building blocks in cognition.
       |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
situations of everyday life. Anthropologist Bonnie Nardi, among 
the first to bring work on context and cognition to a wider audience of interface designers, has advocated a paradigm shift from 
"users  and  systems"  to  "subjects  in  the  social  world."  This  has 
become  vital  to  a  new  era  of  interaction  design  where,  unlike 
earlier desktop graphical interfaces, it is often ambiguous who is 
a "user."5

At its core, activity theory describes a continual rebalancing 
of internal and external knowledge representations. During what 
activity  theorists  call  "internalization,"  learning  first  makes  use 
of  physical  props  and  social  cues,  as  when  you  learn  a  skill  by 
watching someone.6 Conversely, during what they call "externalization,"  acquired  internal  processes  sometimes  resort  to  tools 
when applied under new circumstances, such as when you apply 
them on a different scale or when you  get out your calculator. 
Central  to  activity  theory,  these  external  tools,  props,  and  circumstances act as internal tools. In an influential review of activity  theory,  Nardi  and  fellow  anthropologist Victor  Kapetelinin 
have explained: "Psychological tools turn mental processes into 
instrumental  acts."7  The  interplay  of  internalization  and  externalization allows developed ability to adapt, as to changes of circumstances.  This  lets  experts  play  situations  in  an  adaptive 
back-and-forth that gives external components an active role in 
knowledge, and that continually unites perception, action, and 
knowledge.

To  the  skilled  tool-using  mind,  a  set  of  external  circumstances  becomes  "about"  something.8  A  floor  may  invite  dancing,  just  as  a  rake  may  invite  gardening.  As  people  learn  from 
their settings, they come to associate them with particular states 
of  intent.  Activity  theory  emphasizes  intentionality  far  more 

  (   0   %   2   '   ,   0 (  1   7      |       
than do some competing approaches to the role of external components  in  knowledge.9  Intent  shapes  perception  and,  with  it, 
discovery  of  affordances--possibilities  for  action  afforded  by 
objects or environments; conversely, intent is itself shaped by the 
presence of known affordances.

Because a tool focuses attention on skilled guidance of a specific action, a software object or application that doesn't involve 
skilled guidance should not be called "a tool." Because a medium 
gives expression (or bias) to work, it should not be dismissed as 
"just  a  tool."  Skilled  guidance,  usually  by  means  of  acquired 
sensory-motor skills, usually puts a tool into relationship with a 
medium, enough so that they are sometimes understood as one, 
like  painting.  Skills  and  their  respective  tools  are  acquired, 
applied, and shared within specialized settings and communities 
of  practice.  A  good  set  of  tools  has  a  stable set  of  features  and 
doesn't benefit  from frequent updates. Individual tools suggest 
their respective uses and may require not so much instruction in 
what they are for as practice in how well to use them. The craft 
of using them involves discovering not only finer skills but also 
helpful configurations and combinations. Props prompt ways of 
thinking.  Surfaces  and  channels  position  guidance  to  tools. 
Materials invite processes. Again, these may be attributes of traditional  form  giving  but  can  also  pertain  to  other  mediated 
applications  of  tacit  knowledge.  Of  particular  interest,  practice 
with  circumstances  builds  tacit  knowledge.  Neural  representations of tools and props serve as building blocks for adaptive new 
uses.  Discoveries  tend  to  be  incremental:  they  involve  finding 
not  so  much  one  optimal  way  to  do  something  as  a  hundred 
different  ways,  each  somehow  appropriate  to  its  physical  and 
intentional circumstances.

       |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

Casual discovery of useful circumstances depends on a cultivated situational awareness that is different from instructed use 
of  designed  and  declared  means.  This  is  currently  a  matter  of 
contention among psychologists, or among technology-builders. 
The  influential  visual  cognition  theorist  J.  J.  Gibson  held  that 
affordances  exist  whether  designed  or  not,  and  are  perceived 
directly,  that  is,  without  mediation,  in  relationship  to  intent. 
This was illustrated in William Warren's noteworthy experiment 
on how subjects recognized that a stack of boxes would serve as a 
stair  (figure  4.2).10  This  pertains  to  a  world  where  technology 
too often introduces false (apparent but not actual) possibilities 
for action, or where procedures sometimes preempt discovery of 
undesigned,  undocumented  intrinsic  possibilities  for  action. 
Easier  engagement  brings  attention  to  more  kinds  of  intrinsic 
information.

 + D E L W X D W L R Q
In part, a sense of overload comes from a disregard for the role of 
habitual context, especially in mastery of action. Any technological activities can become automatic and multitasked, technology 

      Unmediated affordance, perceived through embodiment: the Warren experiments in stair climbing (1984). Diagram after William Warren.

  (   0   %   2   '   ,   0 (  1   7      |       
advocates  argue,  just  as  any  dull  routines  can  be  improved  by 
introducing media to make them changeable, or if not, at least to 
tune  them  out.  Yet  even  to  someone  who  has  grown  up  using 
multiple electronic media all day, something is lost when nothing 
persists.

The  more  enduring  the  environment,  the  more  it  shapes 
expectations  without  saturating  attention.  After  regular  exposure, unneeded stimuli become less distracting. With regular use, 
skillful  actions  become  more  subtle  and  efficient.  Technically, 
this  involves  encoding.  The  brain  builds  constructs  to  allocate 
resources  for  frequently  encountered  processes  so  that  they  no 
longer require so much higher-level deliberation.11 When orchestrated across a frequently associated set of operations, such built 
resource  allocation  helps  an  activity  become  automatic;  it  can 
become modular when some of these resource "chunks," or pattern  encodings,  prove  useful  for  other,  unfamiliar  operations. 
This  suggests  why  (albeit  at  some  higher  level)  one  practiced 
skillful activity leads to another, and to greater reflection.

Many of the most natural activities consist of mastering and 
configuring habitual contexts. As in a good kitchen, the arrangements  of  utensils,  materials,  and  processes  reduce  the  need  for 
explicit  models  of  what  must  happen.  A  recipe  may  provide  a 
point  of  departure,  but  what  distinguishes  expert  cooks  from 
merely competent ones is their readiness to depart from it. Much 
of this is habituation to context; it is usually harder to cook in 
someone else's kitchen.

Habit need not be dulling. Habituation allows more perceptive engagement of circumstantial differences in the play of expertise, from day to day, site to site, or group to group. Contrary to 
the  assumptions  of  a  mechanistic  industrial  age,  a  great  deal  of 

       |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
social and organizational knowledge gets embodied in routine.12 
Or, as William James so aptly put it: "Habit is thus the enormous 
fly-wheel of society, its most precious conservative agent."13

Habit  expands  the  context  against  which  newly  changed 
stimuli  may  become  salient.  Richer,  more  tangible  media  can 
play  a  role  in  this.  By  contrast,  disembodiment  can  lead  to 
deskilling and overload. Overmediation and continual flux may 
preempt deeper, less mentally taxing forms of engagement.

 5 X Q D Z D \  2 Q W R O R J \
In  philosophy,  ontology  generally  studies  existence,  especially 
categories of being; but in cognitive science and software design, 
ontology is the process of specifying categorical schema, such as 
a  hierarchy  of  software  classes,  in  which  modularity  and  reuse 
are  particularly  valuable,  more so  than  a simpler  vocabulary  or 
taxonomy. Indeed, ontology has become  so ingrained in information technology through the object-oriented software design 
that today's version of the categorical imperative involves declaring tags, variables, and methods for just about everything. You 
might  call  this  "runaway  ontology,"  though  few  others  have 
thought to do so.14

Although cognition researchers find ontology very useful for 
understanding the modularity and semantics of knowledge representations,  they  increasingly  recognize  that  attention  doesn't 
always  rise  to  the  level  of  formal  symbolic  identities  (figure 
4.3).15 Activity theorists sometimes call this awareness "preontological."  Whereas  computer  scientists  focus  on  categorizations, 
object hierarchies, and  nomenclatures in their work on knowledge  representations,  activity  theorists  have  shown  how  many 
practices occur without such explicit semantic schemes. 

  (   0   %   2   '   ,   0 (  1   7      |       
Like  any  other  organ,  the  brain  operates  biologically,  by 
means not unique to humans. Although Aristotle explained how 
the  body  has  lower  mechanisms  tying  attention  to  emotion, 
recent works in embodied cognition have debated just how. For 
example,  Anthony  Damasio's  influential  1994  book,  Descartes' 
Error, argued that the brain and its deliberations are an addition 
to, not a replacement for, animal biological attention.16 Melvin 
Goodale and David Milner's explanation of "dorsal pathways"17 
had  previously  argued  that  tacit  environmental  perception 
employs  different  processes,  even  different  areas  of  the  brain. 
Thus one patient who had lost the ability to recognize a ball on a 
table could  nevertheless catch it  when it  was thrown.  Much as 

      Pre-ontological awareness is faster.
       |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
foreground vision has a seam where the two eyes' parallax produces  anomalies,  so  background  vision  has  a  seam  at  arm's 
length.  Embodiment  is  essential  to  nondeliberative  perception 
and  thus  to  tacit  knowledge  as  well.  Such  perception  happens 
more  quickly  than  reasoning.  This  explains  why,  like  William 
James's marksman, you can act before you become consciously 
aware of doing so.

From  the  experiential perspective  of  engaged  activity,  runaway  ontology  could  be  counterproductive.  Assigning  names, 
instructions,  and  procedures  to  everything  could  prevent  more 
intrinsic  circumstances  from  contributing  to  the  play  of  tacit 
knowledge.18  Without  stable  tools,  shared  sites  and  configurations,  and  the  capacity  to  move  between  internal  and  external 
representations,  activity  may  not  feel  engaged.  When  external 
representations  are  confined  to  disembodied  digital  media, 
which require deliberative focal attention, or when their designs 
assume that no one is paying attention or has the basic skills to 
engage undeclared affordances, a more tacit awareness based on 
embodied engagement may not develop.

 6 L W X D W L R Q D O  $ Z D U H Q H V V
Soldiers  and  surgeons  alike  tend  to  prize  their  "situational 
awareness."19 The ability to read a context on the fly can mean 
life or death to these experts. Where a merely competent person 
would  play  by  the  rules,  an  expert  knows  when  not  to  and 
directly plays the situation. Such agile awareness of course also 
counts in many smaller, less critical situations of life. Many disciplines whether in computation, cognition, linguistics, organizational studies, or interface design, now emphasize these as an 
alternative to more formalized models of knowledge.

  (   0   %   2   '   ,   0 (  1   7      |       
Numerous, less critical applications of situational awareness 
occur  in  industrial  robotics.  Reporting  from  the  experience  of 
that  field  in  the  1990s,  activity  theorist  Andy  Clark  explained 
the disadvantages of deterministic external models relative to the 
then-new  approach  of  adaptive  neural  network  learning.  In 
doing so, he renewed an age-old goal of cybernetics, namely, to 
build  perceptive  technological  control  systems.  Central  to 
Clark's  contribution,  engagement  with  context  provides  an 
active  resource,  and  not  just  a  starting  input,  for  processes  of 
movement, memory, and other applications of executive attention.  On  the  role  of  structure,  Clark  observed:  "In  general, 
evolved  creatures  will  neither  store  nor  process  information  in 
costly ways when they can use the structure of the environment 
and  their  operations  upon  it  as  a  convenient  stand-in  for  the 
information-processing operations concerned."20

To  use  the  environment  as  an  active  resource  means  that 
skills can neither be acquired nor applied nor explained without 
it. This is a fundamental premise of tacit knowledge. It is also a 
fundamental  principle  in  developmental  learning,  one  that  has 
been around cognitive psychology for fifty years, in the work of 
Lev  Vygotsky,  most  often  considered  the  father  of  activity 
theory.21 The tool metaphors in software interfaces owe much to 
his work. The later consensus that structures of language indeed 
shape  pathways  of  cognition  makes  Vygotsky  seem  prescient. 
But it is the importance that activity theory attaches to structures 
of  physical  tools  and  situated  tasks  that  interests  us  here.  For 
quite some time, it has been thought that a tool, or even its setting, such as a digital craft studio, is not only for some purpose 
but  also  about  it.22  With  respect  to  the  capacity  of  intrinsic 
structure  to  influence  attention,  this  means  that  a  set  of  tools 

       |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
might both put someone in a frame of mind and be essential for 
building that frame of mind in the first place. Clark referred to 
this learning effect as "scaffolding."23

Much  as  a  physical  scaffolding  allows  a  more  permanent 
structure  to  be  built  or  maintained,  so  a  mental  scaffolding 
allows a situated action to be developed and performed. In a critique of robotics, Clark summarized the basis for what are now 
more widely used approaches to emergent patterning (computational  neural  network  learning)  of  actions,  especially  complex 
coordinated motion: "memory as pattern re-creation instead of 
data retrieval; problem solving as pattern completion and transformation; the environment as an active resource, and not just a 
domain  problem;  and  the  body  as  part  of  the  computational 
loop, and not just an input device."24 This resonates well across 
phenomenology,  which  understands  the  world  by  what can  be 
done with it, cybernetics, which seeks a biological metaphor for 
sensate technology, and digital craft, which finds a consummation (i.e., pattern completion) in the flow of engaging a medium.

More  recent  complexity  theory  has  shown  how  a  dog 
making its rounds needs only to connect with a few neighboring 
dogs using just a few messages, all of them in the physical setting 
that they share, for remarkable actions to emerge. Not to engage 
surroundings  would  impair  such  a  system;  that  would  be 
unnatural.

We  have  adopted  the  expression  "intrinsic  information." 
More  generally,  intrinsic  means  "within  the  essential  nature  of 
something." Thus passage is intrinsic to a door. Intrinsic properties persist as long as the things to which they belong do. Physical  persistence  provides  mental  building  blocks.  Without 
persistent structure, the world seems less knowable. Without the 

  (   0   %   2   '   ,   0 (  1   7      |       
recurrent, familiar structure of phenomena as a basis, many pattern-based aspects of cognition have less to work from. Intrinsic 
structure  has  a  place  in  epistemology.  And  nothing  provides 
intrinsic structure quite so well as built environments.

Embodiment  provides  orientation.  The  setting  in  which 
you  are  present  has  the  marks  and  sometimes  the  presence  of 
others. Especially when you know a setting through habitual use, 
it tends to cue your intentions, memory, and perception.25 The 
very configuration of people, places, and things has significance. 
The  persistence  of  some  such  configurations  holds  meaning. 
Thus  there  exist  cities  of  collective  memory,  halls  of  assembly, 
and hallowed commons. Not only architects and planners know 
this.  Each  person,  every  group,  and  any  institution  has  some 
story. The city is made of stories, which you recall by walking. 
The city is also made of signs of these stories, whether inscribed 
or  implied.  A  particular  doorway  or  the  stream  of  pedestrians 
passing through it might recall an event or represent a wish.

Architecture, as an aesthetic production, can raise situational 
awareness  to the level  of  atmosphere, and  thus  make it  part  of 
the  ambient.  In  a  1993  essay  on  atmospheric  aesthetics,  now 
cited  across  a  wide  range  of  disciplines,  philosopher  Gernot 
Bo"hme explained:

The new aesthetics is first of all what its name states, namely, 
a general theory of perception. The concept of perception is 
liberated from its reduction to information processing, provision  of  data  or  (re)cognition  of  a  situation.  Perception 
includes the affective impact of the observed, the "reality of 
images," corporeality. Perception is basically the manner in 
which  one  is  bodily  present  for  something  or  someone  or 

       |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

one's bodily state in an environment. The primary "object" 
of perception is atmospheres. What is first and immediately 
perceived is neither sensations nor shapes or objects or their 
constellations,  as  Gestalt  psychology  thought,  but  atmospheres, against  whose  background the  analytic  regard distinguishes such things as objects, forms, colours, etc.26

A  sensibility  to  architecture,  its  situations,  and  its  atmospheres gives much else continuing relevance in an otherwise lowresolution  world.  The  appreciation  goes  beyond  the  appeal  of 
form, and is as much about persistent inhabitation. A reflective 
awareness that shapes spatial configurations of everyday practices 
may be valued in itself: as a way of engaging intrinsic information, as a community of practice, or as a way of calming.

 ( I I R U W O H V V  $ W W H Q W L R Q
For  understanding  the  craft-like  experience  of  engaged  action, 
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi's oft-cited  theory of  "flow" explains a 
clear basis for calming. It also provides a clear counterpart to the 
focal,  deliberative,  symbolic  processing  kinds  of  cognition  that 
preoccupy  most  cognitive  science  research.  In  a  process  that 
anyone  can  recognize,  flow  occurs  when  you  confront  a  challenge  that  you  can  mostly  master  with  skills  that  you  mostly 
have.  Flow  involves  knowing  how  rather  than  what.  Thus  its 
play  is  tacit--you  may  not  be  able  to  say  what  you  are  doing. 
Most important, in flow, you can meet a higher demand without feeling an increase of effort.27

"Effortless attention" deserves much more respect.28 It is too 
often mistaken for purely automatic attention, which is different 
and has often been the goal of so much behavioral engineering, 

  (   0   %   2   '   ,   0 (  1   7      |       
as  in  conditioned  response  to  repeated  stimuli.  Behavioralism 
has  given  context-and-cognition  research  a  bad  name,  for  it 
reduces individual agency and ignores the importance of intent. 
Automatic attention has also become an easy excuse for abuses of 
multitasking, as if any act becomes automatic if you do it often 
enough. As should be evident from our look at resource switching  and  attentional  set,  that  isn't  the  case.  Few  acquired  tasks 
become fully automatic. Instead, they develop a subtle sensitivity 
to context, in which attention is increased and purposeful, but 
effortless.29

To the philosopher Brian Bruya, who has interpreted Csikszentmihalyi as a part of a larger East-West dialogue on effortless 
attention, sensitivity may be the key. "Rather than a spotlight, or 
a filter, and so on, this model posits that attention may be profitably  conceived  of  as  a  mechanism  of  sensitization  that  draws 
information  relevant to  dynamic contextual  structures of  reference  through  dynamic  processing  pathways."30  The  model 
depends  on  purposeful  engagement  with  persistent  context: 
"Occasionally, activity domains stabilize as temporary predominant structures, inhibiting competing structures of reference by 
virtue  of  the  activity's  autotelicity,  thereby  allowing  for  sustained, focused attention that feels effortless."31

Perhaps because of heightened sensitivities, effortless attention can be rewarding, even restorative. Deliberative focal attention  (the  executive  network)  gets  overworked,  especially  when 
interruptions become more numerous and less predictable, and 
when other kinds of attention diminish. Sitting in the dark with 
a screen is a perfect recipe for this problem. Going for a walk in 
the park, or at least sitting with a view of some trees, seems like 
the easiest cure. Attention restoration theory was introduced by 

       |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
the  psychologist  Stephen  Kaplan  and  the  landscape  architect 
Rachel Kaplan.32 This  theory emphasizes fascination, especially 
with  nature.  Fascination  can  be  involuntary,  especially  when 
"soft"  (as  in  outdoor  recreation)  rather  than  "hard"  (as  in  a 
hobby.)  This  the Kaplans  contrasted  with  voluntary "directed" 
attention, which suffers from fatigue. Attention restoration thus 
becomes an important agenda for those whose cognitive apparatus has somehow been damaged, such as by years of dealing with 
poorly  designed  technology.33  Environments  where  more 
engagement occurs with less effort can help with better practices 
of  attention.  It  seems  fair  to  say  that  attention  restoration, 
whether  in  formalized  research  or  weekend  sports,  taps  some 
latent abilities and preferences.

To what extent can artifice be restorative? Why else are there 
so many movies and games? After a day of drowning in unpleasant  data  being  dumped  on  them  by  others,  some  people  relax 
with an evening of drowning in more pleasant data of their own 
choosing.  But  when  it  comes  to  restoring  the  powers  of  attention, might going for a walk do more good? Can a walk in the 
city do as much good as a walk in the woods? Or is looking at 
high-resolution  images of  the  woods on a  plasma  display  good 
enough?34

Embodiment makes the difference. Walking provides more 
embodiment,  more  opportunity  for  effortless  fascination,  and 
better  engagement  than  looking  or  sitting.  Depending  on  the 
balance of fascinating and annoying stimuli, a walk around town 
may well do some good. That balance is now in play, under the 
rise  of  the  ambient.  This  topic  will  resurface  throughout  this 
inquiry.

  (   0   %   2   '   ,   0 (  1   7      |       
For now, with respect to the workings of attention, simply 
note the distinction between attention as something you pay and 
attention as something that flows, a distinction subtler than the 
distinction  between  voluntary  and  involuntary.  Intentionality, 
sensitivity,  conditioning,  and  contextual  cues  usually  enter  the 
process  of attention.  Engaged action  occurs  without the use  of 
explicit  knowledge  representations, and  with a  diminished  role 
of the executive among attention's three networks.

In particular, note how effortless attention becomes an end 
in  itself.  To  describe  this,  Csikszentmihalyi  popularized  the 
word  autotelic.  As  Bruya  explains,  in  autotelic  experience,  "the 
activity provides the impetus for action, involving a challenging 
activity that requires skill, the merging of action and awareness, 
clear goals and immediate feedback, concentration on the task at 
hand, a feeling of being in control, a loss of self-consciousness, 
and an altered sense of time."35 Losing yourself in the work is a 
gain and not a reduction, even at the neurological level. The psychology journalist Winifred Gallagher has investigated this gain 
through  the  many  indirect  benefits  of  "choosing  the  focused 
life." In the interplay of voluntary and involuntary attention, it 
is  possible  to  cultivate  bias,  as  in  examples  Gallagher  used,  to 
noticing  birds.  Selective  attention  cues  particular  sensibilities, 
which  then  cause  involuntary  attention  to  pick  up  on  some 
stimuli, and not on others. This effect is cumulative, and leads to 
fascination. Plants fascinate gardeners; building details fascinate 
architects;  emergency  rescue  vehicles  fascinate  young  children. 
In this regard, paying attention simply means keeping a commitment  to  stay  fascinated  about  something.  It  is  the  opposite  of 
being  blase',  that  jaded  state  of  overstimulation  held  to  be  the 
default state of modern urban subjectivity. As a cancer survivor, 

       |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
Gallagher learned firsthand how choosing to be fascinated affects 
health  and  motivation.  Top-down  choice  of  sensibility  affects 
which kinds of bottom-up stimuli become salient, which reduces 
the  drift  and  capture  of  attention  by  whatever  comes  along. 
Thus, being fascinated by their respective pursuits, birders, gardeners, musicians, and architects alike have less use for the latest 
media event, the newest gadget, or a background television feed. 
Effortless  attention  may  make  furnished  entertainment  irrelevant, but we can only hope that a surplus of furnished entertainment won't make effortless attention irrelevant.

Although there are neuroscience debates on this, many fields 
find it obvious enough: cumulative, cultivated engagement with 
embodied, direct stimuli provides a defense against predations of 
mediated novelties and interruptions. As Gallagher summarized: 
"Like  fingers  pointing  to  the  moon,  other  diverse  disciplines 
from anthropology to education, behavioral economics to family 
counseling  similarly  suggest  that  skillful  management  of  attention is the sine qua non of the good life and the key to improving  virtually  every  aspect  of  your  experience,  from  mood  to 
productivity to relationships."36 Yet this isn't just positive thinking, and it isn't just growing a thicker skin. For across these disciplines,  and  in  meditation  practices  as  well,  filtering  isn't  so 
much a tuning out as it is a tuning in. Commitment to a bottom-up  sensibility  makes  many  other  things  more  vivid,  and 
mitigates overload from too many top-down demands.37 In particular, it cultivates bias toward intrinsic information as a basis 
for flow. Effortless attention occurs amid practiced engagement 
with a medium, whether the soil, a musical instrument, or your 
favorite design software. It becomes craft. To live well is to work 
well. Engaged, skillful experience makes better citizens.

  (   0   %   2   '   ,   0 (  1   7      |       
 7 D N L Q J  ) R U P
To  summarize  where  this inquiry has  gone  so  far: Ideas  of  the 
ambient began from a philosophical basis in embodiment. Tangible,  embedded,  and  ambient  interfaces  have  now  become 
usual, and appear at street level. Periphery, which you are aware 
of through embodiment, has become much more important in 
the  use  of  information  technology.  Information,  though  normally  assumed  to  be  disembodied,  especially  when  defined  as 
signals  sent,  is  more  accurately  true  semantic  content,  which 
often depends on and refers to a situation. At the same time, the 
intrinsic  structure  of  situation  may  itself  inform,  without  anything  being  sent.  Thus  the  workings  of  attention  include  not 
only  foreground  deliberative  processing  of  symbols  and  messages, but also peripheral orientation to prospective stimuli, and 
not  only  as  inputs  but  also  as  building  blocks  to  cognition. 
Through  embodiment,  attention  engages  undeclared  affordances  that  engage  nameless  actions.  Embodiment  makes  it 
easier to build tacit knowledge, especially through habituation. 
Physical elements often anchor and resonate across abstract processes of cognition. Under the right circumstances, increases of 
attention come with perceived increases of effort or distraction.

Recall  how  embodied  information  is  at  least  twofold.  First, 
being in  the  world,  it  informs through  the  intrinsic  structure  of 
situations, that is, without mediation. And, second, all the mediation that is usually meant by "information" increasingly appears in 
the embodied contexts of everyday life, where it assumes the form, 
or becomes a feature, of familiar objects such as cars and parking 
meters.  This  creates  new  prospects  for  form  that  informs.  In  a 
project  by  Realities  United  (currently  on  hold),  the  ancient 
medium of smoke signals is reapplied to indicate the frequency of 

       |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
CO2  emissions  from  a  waste-to-energy  plant  (figure  4.4).  This 
design has reduced cognitive load by assuming the form of a physical object. This is not just data visualization but also data formation.  It  is  an  interface  you  do  not  operate,  and  as  a  part  of  the 
scene it is ambient. Such developments in ambient interface may 
as yet be a sideshow in comparison to how disembodied information media blanket urban space with their screens, but it's a start. 
As yet, the capacity to tag, to project, or even to inhabit one's own 
contributions  or  one's  group's  curations  of  augmented  urban 
space  is  at  a  very  early  stage.  The  challenge  is  to  find  the  right 
contexts, scale, texture, timescale, and spatial resolution, and then, 
as  this  inquiry  attempts,  to  combine  insights  on  attention  with 
insights  on  the  history  of  the  built  environment.  For  all  of  this 
prospect, it seems wise to note that information can take form.

Smoke rings, Mt. Etna, Italy. Photo: (C)2000 J. Alen. Procession of smoke rings seen from Bo/rsgade, Copenhagen. Design and 

montage: realities:united.

      Embodied information: emissions indicator in the form of smoke rings for a proposed waste-to-energy power plant (architect Bjarke Ingels/BIG). Photos 
courtesy of realities:united.

  (   0   %   2   '   ,   0 (  1   7      |       
        ( 0 % 2 ' , 0 ( 1 7
   0 D L Q  L G H D     ( P E R G L H G  F R J Q L W L R Q
   & R X Q W H U D U J X P H Q W     5 H S U H V H Q W D W L R Q D O  W K H R U L H V  R I  P L Q G
   . H \  W H U P V     3 U H  R Q W R O R J L F D O   U X Q D Z D \  R Q W R O R J \
   : K D W  K D V  F K D Q J H G     & R J Q L W L Y H  V F L H Q F H  R I  H Q J D J H P H Q W
   & D W D O \ V W       ' H V N L O O L Q J  D Q G  G L V W U D F W L R Q
   5 H O D W H G  I L H O G     $ F W L Y L W \  W K H R U \
   2 S H Q  G H E D W H     7 D F L W  N Q R Z O H G J H "

 

 
 ) L [ L W \

What is it like to approach the topic of attention from the perspective of architecture and urbanism? How do the fixed forms 
of architecture and the city channel the flux of ambient information?  Consider  this  role  in  the  more  general  sense  of  the  word 
architecture. Beyond its specific meanings for the design of buildings, this can mean any deliberate, irreversible configuration that 
organizes  and  confers  identity  on  its  inhabitants.  So  you  could 
say  that  architecture's  cognitive  role  begins  with  how  it  fixes 
activities,  even  communications,  into  persistent  arrangements 
(figure 5.1).

In yet another instance of superabundance, countless historians,  theorists,  and  critics  have  contributed  interpretations  on 
the relationship of media, architecture, and the city. Many have 
explored the role of architecture in the media: as film sets, television  backdrops,  spaces  to  explore  in  video  games.  Conversely, 
many  others  have  explored  the  role  of  media  in  architecture: 
radio, then television in the home, signage on building facades, 

       |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
      Architecture's cognitive roles.
smart green buildings. Most of these note how successive layers 
of  communications  media  transform  the  role  of  building,  but 
never fully replace it.

To  look  ahead  in  an  age  of  the  ambient,  such  studies  of 
media  in  architecture  now  invite  environmental  histories  of 
information. This inquiry attempts a start at one, in the book's 
second half, to complement this half's survey of attention. Before 
turning  to  that,  however,  first  consider  architecture  from  the 
perspective  of  attention,  especially  embodied  cognition.  Fixity 
provides  a  distinct  way  into  that.  Although  usually  taken  for 
granted  and  sometimes  sought  to  be  overcome  by  fashionable 

  )   ,   ;   ,   7   <      |       
kinematic  installations,  fixity  distinguishes  architecture.  Few 
other  works  of  design  are  intended  to  hold still,  and  to  last  so 
long.  Once  this  was  valued  more;  many  scholars  and  cultures 
have equated civilization with permanence. Yet even today when 
almost nothing seems permanent, the persistence of some forms 
relative  to  others  still  matters.  An  age  of  flux  still  needs  host 
forms  and  channels,  much  as  a  river  needs  banks.  Instead  of 
"permanence," which by now is a questionable word, it is better 
to describe this configuring quality as "fixity."

 0 L V H  H Q  6 F q Q H
For  a  well-institutionalized  example,  consider  a  courtroom, 
where  almost  everything  has  been  prescribed.  The  courtroom 
demonstrates the principle of "speaking in place."1 Where you sit 
affects what you may say or what may be said to you. Expectations  are  altogether  different  depending  on  whether  you  find 
yourself in the witness stand, the public gallery, or the jury box. 
Where  things  are  written  down  in  the  courtroom  also  creates 
lasting consequences. External feeds such  as video  cameras  may 
be  prohibited.  Inscriptions  carved  into  the  cornices  may  exhort 
citizens  to  put  aside  their  own  interests  and  to  serve  a  higher 
common good.

It  is no accident  that the courthouse is  the grandest  structure in county seats across the United States. These served as the 
main  units  of  political  organization  on  the  frontier,  and  their 
courthouses  were  often  the  first  sign  that  settlers  had  come  to 
stay. Today, when Victorian courthouses are torn down in favor 
of generic glass-and-metal buildings with more convenient parking,  something  surely  is  lost.  Civic  identity  has  to  count  high 
among  architecture's  roles.  Although  a  distinct  civic  structure 

       |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
also has more overtly symbolic functions--you can tell a courthouse from a church at a glance--it operates best by tacitly shaping  public  proceedings.  It  is  also  no  accident  that  Winston 
Churchill's  ever-cited  remark  on  the  social  bias  of  buildings, 
how  "thereafter  they  shape  us"  was  prompted  by  a  proposed 
reconfiguration  of  a  floor  for  formal  public  speaking,  the  wardamaged chambers of the House of Commons.

More mundane architectural venues such as the bistro and 
the  conference  hotel  likewise  come  with  varieties  of  configurations  for  sitting,  listening,  chatting,  or  grandstanding  (as  with 
karaoke or slides). These, too, take cues from the size and shape 
of  tables  and  rooms.  They  demonstrate how  even  in  an age  of 
text messages, social relations still rely on interpersonal distance 
to  affirm  and  constantly  reinterpret  themselves.  Power  brokers 
and  socialites  alike  know  how  to  work  a  room,  and  what  it 
means to stand or sit a few inches closer to or farther away from 
one another.

Specialized  designs  not  only  arrange  people  for  particular 
purposes,  but  also  provide  them  with  useful  configurations  of 
props and tools. A hotel room comes with expected amenities. A 
retail  shop  floor  draws  in  customers  with  a  carefully  studied 
sequence  of  tables,  racks,  and  display  cases.  A  design  center 
might  couple  sleek  front  offices  with  a  backroom  mix  of  toystrewn personal stations, casual meeting spaces, material resource 
bins, and prototype assembly zones. A hospital presents enough 
complex  architectural  requirements,  whether  for  adjacencies, 
technology  support,  or  access  control,  that,  as  a  specialization, 
hospital design keeps any number of architecture practices busy.

Conduct often depends on information fixtures as well--not 
just places to plug in and screens to project on, but also barcodes 

  )   ,   ;   ,   7   <      |       
to scan, cards to swipe, and, even on the simplest of objects, cautionary instructions to accept. As these markup languages proliferate, it is worth understanding the implied significance of their 
placement. How do fixed inscriptions complement mobile communications?  When  does  inscription  reinforce  more  intrinsic 
information in the configuration of a space, and when does it just 
get in the way?

Architectural  computing  pioneer  William  Mitchell  once 
explained this design challenge as a matter of "placing words." To 
shout "Fire!" in a crowded theater means one thing, he began; to 
shout "Fire!" to a squadron of soldiers means another, to affix a 
"Fire"  label  to  a  plumbing  outlet  is  to  tell  firefighters  where  to 
hook  up  a  hose;  but  "if  I  receive  the  text  message  fire  on  my 
mobile phone, at some random moment, I can only respond with 
a puzzled huh?"2 The point is that many words refer to, or take 
scope from, where they are exchanged. A dramatist might understand  this  as  "mise-en-sce`ne":3  a  script  needs  a  setting;  objects 
(props  and  backdrops)  provide  orientation.  A  neuroscientist 
would  understand  this  as  "scaffolding":  the  objects  and  settings 
that  language  refers  to  become  building  blocks  of  action  and 
thought. Rich metaphor depends on analogy in spatial experience. 
Indeed, imaginative thought most often works in metaphors. Such 
mise-en-sce`ne  was  simple  enough  before  telecommunications. 
"The meaning of a local, spoken, synchronous message is a joint 
product of the words, the body language of the participants in the 
exchange, and the setting." Mitchell explained.

But  the  introduction  of  technologies  for  inscribing  physical 
objects with text, and the associated practices of writing, distribution, and reading, created a new sort of urban information overlay. Literary theorists sometimes speak of text as if it 

       |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

were disembodied, but of course it isn't; it always shows up 
attached  to  particular  physical  objects,  in  particular  spatial 
contexts,  and  those  contexts--like  the  contexts  of  speech--
furnish essential components of the meaning.4

Electronic media complicate this overlay. Ubiquitous technologies  exacerbate  this  anytime-anyplace  problem.  Music  and 
television  feeds  show  up  where  they  are  not  welcome.  Mobile 
phones lead to inconsiderate use. Self-service touchscreens with 
network  connections  mediate  ever  more  kinds  of  transactions. 
As  ever  more  diverse  media  cut  ever  deeper  into  everyday  life 
with links and portals to someplace else, people suspend may not 
only disbelief about where they are at the moment, but eventually also a more general sensibility to surroundings.

Mark Twain has  left one of the  earliest surviving  essays  on 
the oddity of hearing half of a phone conversation.5 Early critics 
of  radio  protested  how  it  separated  performance and  reception, 
and created a preference for self-contained content that could be 
repeated  anywhere.6  Whereas  cinema  was  conceived  with  the 
expectation  that  viewers  would  sit  down  to  it,  and  it  alone,  in 
immersive, specialized theaters, programming for radio and television had to be produced with no clear expectation about how it 
would be received. This was true not only for speech but also for 
text and images. These new relations of media and the city eventually led to new abuses of power, especially once radio reached 
everywhere, a reality that totalitarians ruthlessly exploited. Mediaenabled  power  structures  recast  the  role  of  architecture  in  the 
process, or at least forced architects to rethink it with respect to 
broadcast distractions. By the second half of  the twentieth century, such relations became the core focus of social critiques, as by 
the  Frankfurt  school  in  postwar  Germany  or  its  postmodern 

  )   ,   ;   ,   7   <      |       
interpreters  amid  the  runaway  consumerism  of  late  twentiethcentury  America.  Alas,  these  critiques  have  played  up  architecture's part in spectacle to the neglect of its quieter effects.

By contrast, a more basic reading on context and cognition 
would  emphasize  the  role  of  placed  words,  images,  data  feeds, 
and network links as active components of everyday experience. 
It  would  emphasize  the  rising  cultural  importance  and  attainments of the discipline of interaction design, where the aesthetics 
of everyday experience depend less on prepackaged units of transmitted entertainment and more on the discovery, navigation, and 
engagement of local affordances. After a long hiatus in the onesize-fits-all  broadcast  age,  the  relation  of  media  and  the  city  is 
coming back around to more helpful role as mise-en-sce`ne.

 0 D N L Q J  6 H Q V H  W K U R X J K  ) R U P
Form informs. The two words obviously relate. Yet this simple 
truth gets forgotten when information is always considered disembodied. Consider an illustrative case from everyday life. Two 
elegant  doorways  set  side  by  side  in  a  carved  stonework  link  a 
deeply  shaded  courtyard  with  a  long,  tall  reading  room,  finely 
detailed in inlaid wood. To be in one of these spaces is to feel its 
connection  with  the  other,  to  find  that  other  inviting.  The 
design and placement of the doorways are one of those architectural  delights  which  anyone  can  understand  and  which  attract 
visitors  to  a  university  campus.  You  would  feel  like  walking 
though one of the doorways, whether you needed to or not.

Although the courtyard is plainly visible through the leadedglass panels of the doors, local life-safety authorities have recently 
added  a  bit  of  instruction  (figure  5.2):  a  standard  exit  light, 
mounted at eye level on a stand between the two doorways and 

       |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
facing into the building. Perhaps it was required by new federal 
regulations  for  emergency  preparedness  or,  more  likely,  by 
requirements to honor a newer building code when doing other 
work on the older structure. The sign's effective message, however,  is  that,  unlike  in  times  past,  today  somebody  would  not 
otherwise notice the outdoors through the glass door in front of 
them. By building in such a connotation, in effect signs like this 
institutionalize distraction.

Elsewhere in the world, the law still considers some spatial 
configurations  self-evident,  as  if  common  sense  still  exists.  For 

      In case you didn't 
notice .!.!. : an exit sign, 
in the age of compliance.

  )   ,   ;   ,   7   <      |       
example, the canals of Amsterdam not  only lack warning signs 
about  the  possibility  of  falling  in;  they  also  lack  railings.  Yet 
almost no one falls in.

So the lesson is this: in the rush to ambient information, don't 
forget, and don't cover over, the natural meaning of things. Built 
form plays an important role in helping make sense of everyday 
life. Not to know anything through acquaintance would be a great 
loss. And, besides, how can you expect others to raise their environmental sensibility and reorient an entire political economy to a 
changing planet, if you can't expect them to sense, uninstructed, 
that a door with a clear view of the outside is an exit?

Much  as  form  in-forms,  similarly  to  in-habit  habituates 
(figure  5.3).  The more  enduring  the  environment, the  more  it 
shapes  expectations  without  saturating  attention.  To  dwell 
means  not  only  to  reside  but  also  to  maintain  a  bias  of  focus. 
You might dwell in a space, and dwell on a sensibility. By contrast,  without any persistent context,  you are  nowhere.  Relentless  superficial  flux  of  media  undermines  your  sensibility. 
Without  habitual  practice  in  intentionally  configured  settings, 
you will find it hard to achieve a sense of flow. We have examined habituation with respect to tacit knowledge and seen how 
important scale is to that. You don't need instructions to know 
that  a  stair  is  for  climbing,  an  arcade  is  for  strolling,  or  that  a 
tower  asserts  the  prominence  of  its  owners.  Something  you 
glimpse from afar differs from something you examine up close. 
Something you inhabit differs from something you hold.

Thus,  according  to  the  cognitive  principles  presented  thus 
far, environment is not an other, nor an empty container, but a 
perception of persistent possibilities for action. Fixed configurations  of  spaces,  props,  and  artifacts  support  activities  in  ways 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
that  go  beyond  housing  them.  Unmediated  affordances  help 
shape tacit attention. Although habit can assimilate and internalize almost any process, it seldom does so automatically.7 Habitual action still makes some demands on executive attention. An 
increase in tacit knowledge involves an increase of attention but 
a  decrease of perceived effort.  Where mediations are  necessary, 
they  are  best  made  unobtrusive.  Better  interface  design  works 
with  the  embodiment  of  tasks  and  the  configurations  of  the 
spaces that support and constrain tacit knowledge.8

Note how this approach shifts research priorities from behavior to sensibility. Far too often, the goal of research into environment and cognition has been to induce behavior. A great deal of 
space gets socially engineered, whether for retail sales per square 
foot,  test  scores  in  classrooms,  personal  safety  on  sidewalks  at 
night, or production rates on the factory floor. Industrialization 
left  a  bias  toward  procedures  and  against  more  tacit,  habitual 
mastery. When, in the mid-twentieth century, the social sciences 
sought to emulate the predictive certainty of the physical sciences, 

      Ways that form informs.

  )   ,   ;   ,   7   <      |        
the discipline of architecture attempted to apply analytical behavioralism, for example to the design of public schools and housing 
projects. This proved to be inappropriate and unwelcome, however;  the  disciplines  of  architecture  and  cognitive  science  have 
largely avoided one another ever since.

Counterarguments  to  behavorialism  tend  to  emphasize 
intentionality.  Especially  over  time,  to  inhabit  is  to  habituate. 
Inhabitants and spaces mutually adapt. When inhabitants share 
a  perception  of  affordances,  that  reinforces  an  identity  of  the 
environment. As inhabitants learn from their settings, they come 
to  associate  them  with  particular  states  of  intent.  Drawing  on 
accumulated  experience  of  intent,  they  develop  more  abstract 
mental models, which then become second nature. Here again is 
the  cycle  of  externalization  and  internalization  that  lies  at  the 
core  of  activity  theory.9  With  this  focus  on  intentionality  you 
don't have to take up a behavioralist agenda to study cognition.

Organizational theorists use the term sensemaking to describe 
the use of context for coping with complexity and overload. Most 
of  this  context  is  social:  mindful  workers  cue  off  each  other  to 
figure out what is going on, and what they should be doing. But 
some of it is physical, most obviously because specialized configurations  of  spaces  represent  what  has  worked  before,  and  more 
subtly because the sensemaking process depends on other kinds 
of retrospect. Although it may seem like a truism that objects and 
settings  bring  forth  courses  of  action,  it  is  also  something  that 
interaction designers have studied for decades.10 The idea of circumstantial  retrospect  has  been  acknowledged  as  an  important 
contribution to the principles of embodied cognition.

Because more habitual contexts make new cues more salient 
sooner, it is important not to cover them over in too many overt 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
media  and  procedures.  As  noted  in  the  previous  chapter,  runaway  ontology  can  be  counterproductive.  Policy  has  its  limits, 
beyond  which  latent  affordances  must  be  given  play.  In  the 
words  of  Karl  Weick,  the  most  recognized  scholar  of  this  process:  "As  sensemaking  unfolds,  at  least  seven  resources--social 
context, identity, retrospect, salient cues, ongoing projects, plausibility,  and  enactment--affect  not  only  the  initial  sense  one 
develops of a situation, but more important the extent to which 
people will update that sense." This updating demonstrates the 
role  of  contextual  particulars.  "Action  is  always  just  a  tiny  bit 
ahead of cognition," Weick has explained, "meaning that we act 
our way into belated understanding."11

As  architecture  arranges  interpersonal  distances  in  space, 
configures  everyday  processes,  represents  organizations,  and 
shapes everyday habits within them, it also inobtrusively supports 
sensemaking. It does so with quiet alcoves and grand halls, with 
private gates and public plazas, and with specialized sequences of 
rooms.  It tacitly  cues what to  say  where, how  to act in  groups, 
and toward what goals these arrangements have been institutionalized.  Architecture  provides  scaffolding  for  knowledge  and 
expertise, and so contributes to better practices of attention.

 3 H U V L V W H Q W  + L J K  5 H V R O X W L R Q
Amid escalating experience of flickering low-resolution ephemera,  carefully  composed  duration  and  rest  may  seem  welcome. 
This makes architecture's greatest asset its persistent high resolution. Besides furnishing mise-en-sce`ne for communications and 
scaffolding for sensemaking, fixity provides exercise and rest for 
attention.  It  does  so  by  means  of  high  resolution  with  low 
demands, through something as simple as a view of sun crossing 

  )   ,   ;   ,   7   <      |        
a  wall.  As  noted  with  respect  to  attention  restoration  research, 
this  helps  explain  how  to  avert  a  sense  of  overload.  Access  to 
natural phenomena may restore attention best, and participation 
in art or sports may help as well--hence these are called "recreation"--but what of more living with the details of buildings? 

Consider  a  simple  stone  wall  (figure  5.4).12  The  texture  of 
stone appeals to the eye. You could study it at length, or just keep 
it  in  background  view  all  day.  A  seat  with  a  view  of  this  wall 
would  be  a  better  place  to  work  all  day  at  a  laptop  than  a  seat 
with only views of painted wallboard, or of textile-covered steel 
cubicles.  Orientation  would  matter:  the  slow  change  of  light 
through the day, or the slower change of the color of moss over 
the  seasons,  would  improve  the  effect.  More  subtly,  immediate 
orientation would suggest larger orientation within the city and 
the  world.  You  might  know  which  way  is  east,  and  that  might 
somehow  come  to  matter.  Meanwhile,  you  might  receive  some 
cultural orientation from posters that come and go on the wall. 
And  you  might  have  a  different  reaction  if  somebody  signs  the 
wall in spray paint one night: it might feel like a transgression. So 
might a corporate advertising campaign. If a local billboard company mounted an electronic display on the wall, you might feel 
angry, helpless, or hurt. But even if you could mount your own 
display there and, in the limit case, cover the wall with pixels on 
which to display whatever you like--perhaps Parisian boulevards 
one  day  and  Montana  forest  scenery  the  next--you  probably 
wouldn't.  And  you  probably  wouldn't  even  if  the  technology 
were  provided  at  no  monetary  cost.  For  the  cost  in  attention 
management  would  be  high.  And,  in  the  long  run,  the  play  of 
shadows on the stone does a better job than any digital wallpaper 
could  at  balancing  your  attention.  No  pixel  technology  could 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

      Persistent high resolution.

deliver quite such high resolution, nor be expected to change its 
appearance quite slowly enough, nor to have such fixity.

The word patina helps capture this sense of slowly changing, 
irregular,  accumulated  texture.  In  the  case  of  stone,  weathering 
alone will provide some of that texture. To sculptors, patina may 
mean deliberate tarnishing, as of bronze by acid wash. To others, 
patina may mean a buildup of oils, irregularities in the patterns of 
regular cleaning, or subtle erosion of material by wear. Makers of 
blue  jeans  and  designer  furniture  may  carefully  "distress"  their 
wares before selling them. Architects often explain how weathering is a feature, not a defect. For, besides exposure to the elements, 
weathering  can  reflect  patterns  of  use,  as  in  the  gradual  wear  of 
stone steps. Such accumulated traces may afford learning, cultural 
traits, and acquired perceptivity at a more abstract societal level.

  )   ,   ;   ,   7   <      |        
Without  some  persistent  structure,  attention  diminishes. 
Total novelty disarms. Better to have serendipity amid practice. 
Thus it makes sense that there is no better basis for cultural practice than the enduring city. You almost can't have one without 
the other. As you return to it, across your lifetime, a great city 
reflects  how  times  have  changed,  and  how  you  have  changed. 
Later in life, these reflections start feeling more important than 
new  sights,  although  to  the  seasoned  traveler,  new  sights  also 
reflect  better-known  ones.  You  might  trace  a  chosen  theme 
across the  world  in  its  subtle  differences  and  its  changing relationships to more persistent, recognizable settings.

How  does  the  persistent  high  resolution  of  the  built  environment  complement  the  jumpy  low  resolution  of  the  screen? 
How, instead of everything happening anywhere, can a specific 
spatial  configuration  afford  one  activity  better  than  another? 
How  do  tools,  props,  scale,  and  access  tend  to  shape  activity, 
whether in meeting spaces, negotiation rooms, design studios, or 
public squares? Urban historians assume the existence of a city of 
collective memory, and thus the importance not only of its commemorative  inscriptions  but  also  of  its  casual  conditions  and 
their residues. Ethnographers seek evidence of unofficial "turfs" 
and  tacit  social  geographies.  Environmentalists  ask  which  residues are considered pollution. Cultural critics look for connections between the urban pattern and the communication media 
politics  behind  it.  Architects  emphasize  how  the  rise  of  infrastructures,  such  as  electrification  a  century  ago  or  smart  green 
thermal  systems  now,  creates  opportunities  and  challenges  for 
creative  work.  They  ask  how  any  of  these  serve  collective 
memory,  become  a  usable  public  infrastructure,  or  take  on 
aspects of a commons.

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

The word palimpsest, a surface that shows traces of previous 
inscriptions, comes from the practice  by medieval calligraphers 
of  reusing  precious  sheepskin  parchments.  It  was  appropriated 
into urbanism by critics of clean-slate urban renewal. Better that 
the city bear traces of its past. Better that continual development 
occur bottom up, full of gaps and imperfections, than top down 
according to some totalizing quest for transparency.

For if all experience were as erasable as a screen, some longer 
views about place in the world might suffer, even vanish. Some 
authoritarian  views  could  be  imposed  overnight.  Individuals, 
interest groups, and institutions might lack the means to curate 
ever-changing, externally imposed phenomena. A new dark age 
could  arise  amid  information  superabundance.  Instead  of  scarcity so extreme that you had to scrape used sheepskins to obtain 
any writing surfaces, under extreme superabundance just about 
everything  could  be  an  erasable  writing  surface.  In  both  cases 
perhaps too few inscriptions would persist.

The  perspective  of  architecture  and  urbanism  may  prove 
useful to work in cognitive science, interface arts, and the history 
of  information.  When  several  fields  converge  to  gain  a  better 
grasp  of  situated  attention,  perhaps  they  will  produce  greater 
well-being.  Perhaps  they  will  know  better  whether  persistent, 
inhabitable, inescapably shared information becomes a new kind 
of commons. Perhaps there is a topology to embodied information. Tagging a GPS coordinate with a label is not the same as 
covering  a  wall  with  an  image  or  filling  a  space  with  a  sound. 
Thus, for a start at the environmental history of information, a 
topology of points, areas, volumes, and networks forms the categories and sequence of the chapters to come (figure 5.5).

  )   ,   ;   ,   7   <      |        
In  architecture  and  urbanism,  you  can't  just  turn  off  the 
screen, or flip to another channel. You have to live in the artifacts.  Despite how  private and  public  players  have shaped particular  elements  of  built  space,  there  is  always  some  common 
circumstance to inhabitation, a circumstance that shapes action 
and  perception.  Now, as  information  technologies  infuse  these 
circumstances,  how  does  that  affect  inhabitation?  Is  there  anything about architecture's cognitive role that must be upheld or 
lost, lest it be covered in more ephemeral phenomena at lower 
resolution?  Conversely,  where  mediation  enlivens  a  space  or 
makes an urban resource more usable, is there anything about its 
inhabitation that invites perception as a commons?

      One topology of the ambient.
        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

        ) , ; , 7 <
   0 D L Q  L G H D     $ U F K L W H F W X U H · V  F R J Q L W L Y H  U R O H V
   & R X Q W H U D U J X P H Q W     , Q F U H D V H G  P R E L O L W \
   . H \  W H U P V       0 L V H  H Q  V F q Q H   V H Q V H P D N L Q J
   : K D W  K D V  F K D Q J H G     3 H U Y D V L Y H  L Q I R U P D W L R Q  W H F K Q R O R J \
   & D W D O \ V W     2 X W  R I  F R Q W H [ W  P H G L D
   5 H O D W H G  I L H O G     $ U F K L W H F W X U H
   2 S H Q  G H E D W H     9 D O X H  R I  S H U V L V W H Q F H "

 

 , ,
 7 R Z D U G  D Q  ( Q Y L U R Q P H Q W D O 

 + L V W R U \  R I  , Q I R U P D W L R Q

 

 
 7 D J J L Q J  W K H  & R P P R Q V

What is an environmental history of information? The act of tagging the commons invites this question. Many kinds of markings 
reveal  the  city  as  a  collective  cultural  work.  They  also  trace  the 
remarkable  diversification  of  information  technology.  So  in  its 
explorations of the ambient, this inquiry now turns from the subjectivity of attention to the objectivity of information in the built 
environment, and, where possible, to its history.

This begins with the tag. There is no simpler piece of situated  technology.  Although  overtly  semantic  itself,  a  tag  quickly 
shifts  attention  to  the  intrinsic  structure  of  whatever  it  labels. 
Tags are simpler and possibly more prevalent than screens, which 
are the assumed focus in today's economics of attention. Whereas 
the contents of a screen are disembodied and usually disengaged 
from context, a tag is almost always about something right here. 
More basically still, a tag is physically inscribed and not sent.

Once upon a time, the ancients stood stones in an enchanted 
landscape. Later on, emperors chiseled proclamations into marble 

        |        $   0   % ,  (  1  7     &   2   0   0   2   1   6
facades.  Opposing  street  gangs  scrawled  slogans  on  walls  in  the 
night.  Shopkeepers  washed  down  the  sidewalks  each  morning, 
then  put  out  menus  of  the  day's  wares.  Barkers  pushed  broadsides,  often  literally  in  your  face.  Prefects  and  police  posted 
notices  and  regulations.  Commissions  installed  commemorative 
plaques. Soldiers and sailors proudly flew their colors. Portraits of 
Lenin  and  Stalin  hung  over  apparatchiks'  desks.  Fresh  batik 
draped over old statues of Ganesh. Crosses and crescents glinted 
in  the  sun  atop  spires.  And  more  recently,  bank  logos  glowed 
atop  skyscrapers  through  the  night.  Advertising  campaigns 
advanced onto all manner of surfaces that formerly lacked inscriptions. Teenagers spray painted tags around town, likewise building their brand.

Digital media now transform these tales. Tagging has turned 
technological,  from  huge  programmable  facades  to  wearable 
fashion accessories to tiny radio frequency identification (RFID) 
chips.  A  new  kind  of  information  commons,  different  from 
those in disembodied electronic cyberspace, may be taking form 
at street level.

Architects  again  admit  of  signage  and  ornament.  Planners 
make policies about light pollution and mobile noise. Information 
designers build wayfinding systems for use on handheld gadgets. 
Interaction designers seek delight in embodied social navigation. 
These  design  and  cultural  opportunities  may  rival  those  of  any 
past era of technological change, such as electrification a century 
ago.  The  cultural costs  could  well surpass those of  other  ages  as 
well, even those of automobiles to cities. 

Situated  technologies  may  not  dominate  everyday  conceptions  of  information  technology  beyond  smartphones  and 
screens.  Surveillance  usually  draws  more  concern.  Big  data 

 7  $  *  *  ,  1   *    7   +   (    &   2   0   0   2   1   6      |        
clouds now draw the most business hype. More basic concerns 
about  digital  divides  in  supposedly  ubiquitous  Internet  access 
precede more abstract concerns about ambient information. In 
other words, the cultural shift from what was called "cyberspace" 
(a quaint word by now) to pervasive computing seems only partial.  Obsession  with  mobile  smartphones  masks  an  equally 
important design challenge of embedded sensors, data, and processing. So let the simple tag stand for the fact that there are situated technologies, too.

Beginning  from  the  simplicity  of  the  tag,  let  this  inquiry 
take a topological survey of the expanding contexts and formats 
of information that are so altering the nature of attention. Consider tags as points, glowing surfaces as areas, architectural space 
and  atmospheres as volumes, and  urban resources as  networks. 
To explore how the ambient becomes a reality and its design and 
governance  become  cultural  necessities,  begin  from  a  timeless, 
everyday, and utterly local act: writing on the walls.

 8 U E D Q  0 D U N X S  / D Q J X D J H V
The simple act of marking the city reveals larger cultural aspects 
of the commons. To explore such aspects, consider, for example, 
the simple sticker. More so than its meaner aerosol counterparts, 
adhesive art seeks some shared cultural ground.

Indeed, the adhesive tagger Shepard Fairey, creator of Obey 
Giant,  of  which  some  half  million  instances  were  once  said  to 
exist,1 and of the memorable red-and-blue Barack Obama campaign  poster,  whose  imitations  and  mockeries  seemed  to  rival 
the Giant in their ubiquity, was for a time considered the most 
eminent  visual  artist  in  the  United  States.  In  an  illustration  of 
how motifs and tastemakers cross cultural borders, the Institute 

        |        $   0   % ,  (  1  7     &   2   0   0   2   1   6
for  Contemporary  Art  in  Boston  marked  the  occasion  of  the 
Obama  inauguration  with  an  exhibition  on  Fairey,  and  with  a 
Giant on its facade (figure 6.1).

On the street, a tagger is someone who signs in aerosol. To 
tag  is  to  spray  paint  your  name.  Most  people  consider  aerosol 
signing to be antisocial, and many cities have made it a crime. Yet 
among  insiders,  aerosol  signing  provides  what  an  information 
professional  might  call  a  "reputation  system."  Anyone  who  can 
sign  all  over  town  without  getting  caught  in  the  act  must  be  a 
"badass." At some animal level, in the realm of embodied cognition,  tagging  just  marks  territory,  without  civic  aspiration.  But 
then it becomes social--defiantly in its choices of site, competitively in which tags are respected and not soon written over by 
rivals, and culturally in how some signs become noticed by the 
general public and even appreciated by critics. Why else would so 
many art museum gift shops offer coffee-table catalogs of graffiti?

Graffiti.org,  the  most-linked  compendium  of  curatorialminded graffiti enthusiasts, called itself "Art Crimes." Washington's arbiters of art have said otherwise, however: "Large graffiti 
pieces are also on display in the `hallowed halls' of the National 
Portrait Gallery."2 Yet before curators official or unofficial step 
in, the corporate coolhunters have already been through. Tastemaking mines street culture first. It is difficult to make cultural 
generalizations about the street, where there are as many styles as 
there are taggers. For present purposes, it is fair to assume that 
conflation of art, crime, curation, hyperlinking, and online tagging of sampled street art only adds to how many ways, and to 
how many different sets of eyes, fresh markup stays hip. "I think 
we  owe  everything  to  the  Internet,"  traffic  sign  modifier  Dan 
Witz has observed.3

 7  $  *  *  ,  1   *    7   +   (    &   2   0   0   2   1   6      |        
      Obey Giant on the Institute of Contemporary Art (ICA) building, Boston, 2009. Photo: Joe C./www.random-pattern.com. 

The aggregate of so many  tags on the street  is more problematic,  however.  Citywide,  rampant  graffiti  indicate  distress, 
and tend to invite other troubles. Anyone who remembers New 
York in the 1970s will know this to be true.4 There the graffiti 
reached  an  unprecedented  scale,  most  memorably  covering 
almost all subway cars (figure 6.2). In response, subway rail yards 
got fenced in concertina wire, wide-nibbed markers were taken 
off  the  market,  and  penalties  for  aerosol  signing  began  to 
escalate.5

        |        $   0   % ,  (  1  7     &   2   0   0   2   1   6

As New York's recovery from its troubled conditions of the 
1970s  made  clear,  one  of  the  most  useful  public  policies  is  to 
fight any appearance of anomie. It is important to assert the existence of a commons. This position was made memorable by the 
theory  of  "broken  windows,"  introduced  in  the  early  1980s: 
"Social  psychologists  and  police  officers  tend  to  agree  that  if  a 
window in a building is broken and is left unrepaired, all the rest 
of the windows will soon be broken.!.!.!. Vandalism can occur 
anywhere, once communal barriers--the sense of mutual regard 
and the obligations of civility--are lowered by actions that seem 
to signal  that `no one cares.'!.!.!. Such an area is vulnerable to 
criminal invasion."6

Among the side effects of New York's cleanup, more interesting  variants  of  tagging  appeared.  Adhesive  art  or  "slap  tagging,"  for  instance,  Shepard  Fairey's  medium,  took  off  with 
"Hello My Name Is _______" stickers, normally used for casual 
business  receptions.  Today  the  "I  Wish  This  Was  ________" 
sticker  uses  the  same  visual  format  for  suggesting  street-level 
improvements.7  Stickers  had  a  past  in  posters,  of  course:  long 
before electronic media, posting lithographic bills was the main 
form of advertising. Thus most cities have rules about flyposting. 
But compared to spraying, stickering makes it easier to hit more 
locations, and easier to stay out of jail.8 Still less risky is "reverse 
graffiti,"  a  new  genre  of  erasure,  which  helps  owners  remove 
grime  from  their  walls.  Such  noncriminality  has  helped  move 
street  art  beyond  teen  angst  and  into  the  cultural  mainstream, 
such as museums.9 Stylistically, there is something in the air that 
favors urban markup.

The  rise  of  electronic  tagging  may  not  hurt  this.  Many 
people  and  organizations  of  respectable  means  now  have  their 

 7  $  *  *  ,  1   *    7   +   (    &   2   0   0   2   1   6      |        
own use for the word. To tag is to insert keywords into content, 
for example, as when photo sharing in FlickR. Lately, the most 
fashionable format has been the hashtags of Twitter. More generally, tagging implies all manner of metadata: smaller identifiers 
for larger pieces of information. The openness is one reason why 
tagging has exploded in popularity. Anyone can make up a keyword, and there is no such thing as a wrong tag. And now with 
GPS location data, RFID identity tagging, and augmented city 
smartphone  overlays  like  Layar  catching  on,  a  new  middle 
ground of tagging has come into being.

The curatorial prospects seem huge, far beyond what museums have done with purely physical tagging. Bottom-up tagging 

      Graffiti on New York subway cars, 1973. Photo: Erik Calonious, EPA. 
        |        $   0   % ,  (  1  7     &   2   0   0   2   1   6
online has great potential for emergent effects. As of 2012, the 
augmented reality business appeared ready to explode.10 Whatever may happen, the complex patterns that arise from very large 
numbers  of  very  simple  elements  may  eventually  stabilize  into 
enduring relationships, and useful classification schemes.11 That, 
in turn, provides an excuse for going out on the town.

 & D U Y H G  , Q V F U L S W L R Q V
Stickers don't last the way carved marble does. The arts of urban 
markup differ not only by intended effect, but also by duration. 
To "set it in stone" means to leave something for the ages. Stone 
still  has  clout,  even  in  a  media-saturated  age.  Of  bygone  eras 
when written communications were scarce, one can only imagine the power of a proclamation chiseled into a stele or portico.

The  discipline  of  epigraphy  studies  the  messages  found  in 
archaeological remains, usually in stone. This has long been important  to  classical  studies.  Universities  had  epigraphers  before  they 
had  architects.  Epigraphers  must  interpret  findings  against  whatever else is known about a culture through other means in order to 
establish enough context to make sense of tags. Necessarily short 
tags "tend to omit pertinent information that is already known by 
the  intended  audience,"  observed  epigrapher  Bradley  McClean,12 
who listed eighteen categories of stone markings commonly found 
in classical Mediterranean cultures (figure 6.3).

Architecture has  often provided  both physical and  cultural 
context for making sense of inscriptions. Architectural historians 
assert  how,  long  before  print,  the  inscription and  ornament  of 
buildings provided an effective information medium. For example, the facade of a church could at once, through its iconography,  educate  the  laity--perhaps  also  providing  a  pulpit  from 

 7  $  *  *  ,  1   *    7   +   (    &   2   0   0   2   1   6      |        
which  the  clergy  might  speak--and,  through  its  magnificence, 
stand as a visual sign of the aspirations of the society that built it. 
Of  course, cultures  differed  in how  their  sacred structures  performed this didactic role, whether through tags and texts, images 
and imposing facades, or meaningful sequences of spaces; some 

      Categories in classical epigraphy (source: Bradley McLean.) Background: stele, with decree of phoros (tribute) to Delian League (447 BCE). Photo: 
Marie-Lan Nguyen/Wikimedia Commons.

        |        $   0   % ,  (  1  7     &   2   0   0   2   1   6
structures were fairly covered in script. It is an oft-cited story in 
the history of architecture how print usurped this role. "Architecture  is  the  great  book  of  humanity,"  Victor  Hugo  famously 
lamented  on  the  rise  of  print,  "Gutenberg's  letters  of  lead  are 
about to supersede Orpheus's letters of stone."13

Although  the  Victorian  city  was  full  of  everyday  print  uses 
like none before it,14 the arts of inscribing stone continued, and 
even increased for a time, especially with respect to architectural 
ornament.  Steam-powered  industrial  machines  made  the  rough 
work much easier, which gave skilled stone carvers time for more 
of the projects that slowly changing cultural tastes still demanded. 
Medallions,  swags,  and  sgraffites  ornamented  holy  and  unholy 
edifices alike (figure 6.4). This produced an overload in its own 
right:  fine  ornamental  motifs  were  executed  more  often  (now 
outside of traditional cultures) just because it had become technically feasible. As crude new technologies served ornate tastes still 
shaped by previous handicraft sensibilities, the results were especially ponderous. Not only in buildings, but also in clothing and 
the decorative arts, overdone ornament became the signature of 
the Victorian age, at least as seen in retrospect from the twentieth 
century, after skills and tastes had changed.

Today,  a  single  gravestone,  one  of  the  few  remaining 
instances  of  tagging  for  the  ages,  can  cost  thousands.  To  fund 
the carving  of  a  simple  dedication in  the cornice  of  a  building 
takes the resources of a state or, at least, a grand public institution. The artisans who carved stone for the Beaux-Arts libraries, 
concert  halls,  and  museums  of  the  industrial  city  aren't  so 
numerous now. In the recent past, you could find a few at work 
on the Cathedral of Saint John the Divine, in New York, where 
they were supported by diamond-edge digital gang saws that did 

 7  $  *  *  ,  1   *    7   +   (    &   2   0   0   2   1   6      |        
all but the finish work; more recent advances in robotic water jet 
cutting are renewing the art of stone cutting, but only in a handful of studio cultures.15

Official,  exclusive,  and  enduring,  stone  is  graffiti's  pure 
opposite.  Except  the  two  do  share  one  trait:  relationship  to  a 
commons.

 5 D P S D Q W  6 L J Q D J H
Most  official  inscription  today  supports  what  matters  most: 
moving about safely. To alter traffic and safety instructions on 
your own could be just as much of a crime as aerosol signing.

      Trade inscription for an architect's office, Paris.

        |        $   0   % ,  (  1  7     &   2   0   0   2   1   6

Standardized instructional signage didn't always exist. Consider  its  rise  in  Paris,  for  example.  In  her  influential  history  of 
the city as text, Priscilla Ferguson explained the early nineteenthcentury  program  of  naming  and  charting  the  whole  of  Paris: 
"That streets should have names is not self-evident. For centuries, most villages and towns felt no need to name their streets, 
and even today a major urban center like Tokyo manages to do 
without them."16 This naming program was a major reconceptualization.  "Street  names  and  other  symbols,  [Abbe']  Gregoire 
reminded the Assemble' Nationale, provided the Revolution with 
means  to  do  what  no  regime  had  ever  done--institute  reason 
and popular sovereignty."17 Contrary to popular misconceptions 
about their neutrality, tagging systems exist with a purpose, by 
and  for  particular  constituencies.  Not  everything  gets  tagged, 
and systems and selections of tags define and shape the groups 
they serve. Writing about the rise of guidebooks, but with implications for other uses as well, Ferguson observed how publishers 
felt that "unmediated contact with the city is inadequate at best, 
and probably dangerous as well."18

Today  a  small  industry  in  environmental  graphics  serves 
these needs. In America, the Society of Environmental Graphic 
Design (SEGD) claims 1,600 members, who work on "wayfinding systems, architectural graphics, signage, exhibit design, identity  graphics,  dynamic  environments,  civic  design,  pictogram 
design,  retail  and  store  design,  mapping,  and  themed  environments."19  Yet  members  of  many  other  disciplines  have  also 
engaged in these pursuits. Environmental graphics was a growth 
industry long before digital location tagging became widespread. 
Just look at all the signs going up lately to proclaim what once 
was obvious to all. "If the door is closed, do not enter," one sign 

 7  $  *  *  ,  1   *    7   +   (    &   2   0   0   2   1   6      |        
parody  reminded,  at  the  2009  Edinburgh  Festival  Fringe.20 
Operational  and  safety  instructions  nearly  rival  advertisements 
in their ubiquity.

Instruction  occasionally  operates  with  intrinsic  structure 
instead of  placard signage. For example, California color  codes 
its curbs in paint to indicate parking restrictions. In Germany, 
differences  in  surface  texture  remind  bicyclists  and  pedestrians 
which band of the sidewalk to use.

Officialdom sometimes even operates in aerosol. Thus construction  crews  spray  color-coded  arrows  on  the  pavement  to 
indicate  utility  lines  below.  When  the  phrase  "urban  markup" 
was catching on among digerati, who would (unofficially) "warchalk"  free  Wi-Fi  hotspots  for  one  another's  benefit,  Wired 
magazine ran a piece on pavement spray tags:

If you know the lingo, you can visualize the dense architecture  that  sprawls  beneath  our  streets.  The  paint  colors  are 
fairly standard: Red denotes power lines; yellow flags oil and 
gas;  blue  is  for  fresh  water;  green  indicates  sewage;  purple 
highlights reclaimed H2O; and orange tags communications 
or  cable  TV  lines.  Some  acronyms,  like  MCI  or  SBC,  are 
obvious; others aren't. IP, for example, means "iron pipe," 
and  U.S.A.  stands  for  "underground  service  alert"  (the 
aforementioned area slated for excavation). As Mike Hart, a 
plumber for the San Francisco water department puts it, "I 
tell my kids that I'm a graffiti professional."21

Meanwhile,  whether  with  logo  or  image,  advertising  tags 
most widely. This too has a history. In the tradition of architecture  as  display  medium,  especially  before  the  rise  of  broadcast 
media,  businesses  painted  advertisements  on  the  sides  of  their 

        |        $   0   % ,  (  1  7     &   2   0   0   2   1   6
buildings (figure 6.5). In the nineteenth century, color lithography pushed postering into widespread public view, which led to 
restrictions on flyposting resembling those on graffiti. Then, in 
the  twentieth  century,  electrification  blurred  distinctions 
between broadcast  and  architecture  in new,  and  often  inescapable  ways.  Today,  electronic  overlays  accelerate  and  transform 
that process. Advertising tags locations, consumers, and transactions  alike,  and  then  aggregates  and  mines  them.  Advertising 
makes brands into places and places into brands. Even more so 
than with image, advertising operates in trademarks, logos, and 

      Hand-painted signage, Beaufort, South Carolina. Photo: Walker Evans, 1936 (Minneapolis Institute of Arts).

 7  $  *  *  ,  1   *    7   +   (    &   2   0   0   2   1   6      |        
other point-specific, one-dimensional signifiers of brand. Moreover, it does so transgressively, like graffiti, ever advancing into 
places formerly free of its tags.

In  his  huge  2003  volume  of  street-level  photography, 
Tokyo-phile editor Eric Sadin called it "Times of the Signs":

Giant screens. . . Printed matter. . . Information facades. . . 
Interactive terminals. . . Screen arrangements. . . Flags . . . 
Billboards. . . T-shirts. . . On the tips of our toes (walking 
on  characters).  .  .  Global  brands.  .  .  URLs  in  the  city.  .  . 
Mobile phones. . . Luxury brands and architecture. . . Video 
games. . . Signage. . . Neon signs. . . Pachinko. . . Print club. 
. . Karaoke. . . Sex stickers. . . Information [sandwich] men. 
.  .  Public  phones  .  .  .  Media  buildings.  .  .  E-learning.  .  . 
Electronic billboards. . . Sound information. . . Surveillance. 
. . GPS. . . Internet cafe's. . . 22

 & D V H V  L Q  $ G K H V L Y H  ( O H F W U R Q L F V
As  a  way  to  rethink  handheld  urban  computing,  location-based 
media, and their interplay with electrified architecture, you might 
start with simple pixel liberation. Not every square of light needs a 
frame. Anything that lights up and can be attached to some other 
surface potentially becomes a tagging system. If it also communicates,  it  can  become  part  of  a  larger  image.  One  serendipitous 
such device, which caught the imagination of artists and designers 
online,  was  the  "LED  throwie,"  developed  by  Graffiti  Research 
Lab in 2006. Each consisting of one or more LEDs (light-emitting diodes), a coin battery, and a rare-earth magnet, LED throwies,  as  their  creators  winked,  were  "an  inexpensive  way  to  add 
color to any ferromagnetic surface in your neighborhood."23

        |        $   0   % ,  (  1  7     &   2   0   0   2   1   6

Adhesive art shows how location-based media don't always 
need  GPS  or  Bluetooth  to  be  known.  It  raises  an  important 
question about environmental awareness and the ambient. Can 
the  purpose  of  handheld  electronic  media  move  beyond  communicating for the sake of communicating, beyond tuning out 
so much of the world through personalizing everything, to helping  someone  be  here  now,  in  the  sense  of  knowing  an  urban 
commons?

An  especially  well  known  project  for  such  purposes  was 
Yellow  Arrow  (2003-07;  figure  6.6),  recognized  by  the  New 
York Times as one of the earliest instances of "the Internet overlaid" on the physical world "to make the city more browsable,"24 
and exhibited by New York's Museum of Modern Art in 2008. 
The arrow itself took the form of a palm-size sticker. Each sticker 
had a unique alphanumeric code to use in text messaging to and 
from  Yellow  Arrow's  servers;  you  could  buy  one  for  50  cents, 
stick it anywhere you dared (or had permission to, as the organization  advised,  to  keep  it  legal),  and  upload  a  short  text  comment  about  that  place.  Passers-by  who  came  across  the  sticker 
could  then  text  the  indicated  code  and  read  your  comment  or 
upload another of their own. Over the four-year run of the project, several thousand stickers were applied, mostly in a few pilot 
cities. Even  though most arrows  were one-offs (as  is natural  in 
such  a  bottom-up  authorship  format),  some  civic  themes  did 
emerge. In Copenhagen, the arrows were often used for political 
debate, for example  about  infrastructure issues, and  in  Boston, 
mainly to serve the cause of bicyclists' rights.

In hindsight (Yellow Arrow closed for reasons of scale and 
funding),  much  of  the  project's  appeal  came  from  the  interaction aesthetic of physical tagging. Whereas the social networking 

 7  $  *  *  ,  1   *    7   +   (    &   2   0   0   2   1   6      |        
aspect may have prevailed at the time because Yellow Arrow was 
seen as a community by some participants and as a way of life by 
a crazy few, more recent technologies and especially Twitter have 
taken  that  experience  to  new  and  different  levels.  Instead,  the 
physical  placement  aspects  of  the  project  stand  out.  Here  was 
social  networking  that  was  not  ubiquitous,  that  involved  the 
delight  of  discovery,  that  tested  the  cultural  and  material  constraints of the city, and that tapped into the unofficial, uncriminal  coolness  of  stickering.  "It's  been  called  a  game,  a  form  of 
graffiti,  and  the  largest  performance  art  piece  ever  attempted," 

      Yellow Arrow (2003-08), some instances in Copenhagen, tagging transit data. Photos: courtesy of Jesse Shapin.

        |        $   0   % ,  (  1  7     &   2   0   0   2   1   6
wrote the Harvard Crimson.25 Yellow Arrow was something you 
could do on a dare.

There have been even simpler early web-served tagging systems.  Grafedia  first  took  open-keyword  media  sharing  to  the 
walls.  Its  assumed  medium  was  handheld  picture  messaging, 
although it also allowed small texts and sounds. Having invented 
a keyword and posted some annotations with it, a user would tag 
in blue chalk to resemble hyperlinked words on the web, and so 
engage  literally  and  physically  in  hypertext  markup  language. 
This has not become widespread.

Far  more  frequent  is  tagging  a  URL  (Universal  Resource 
Locator, or web address) with a QRC  (Quick Response Code) 
sticker, which is, in effect, the two dimensional barcode. Indeed, 
in Japan, where it shows up everywhere from food packages to 
gravestones, the QRC format is well on its way to supplanting 
the  UPC  one.  Worldwide,  the  best-known  early  instance  of 
QRC tagging in the geospatial web was Semapedia, which linked 
to Wikipedia entries. Semapedia generated a smartcode file for 
any Wikipedia article, and sent that file for printout, for use in 
tagging.  Launched  in  2005,  Semapedia  generated  over  50,000 
tags.  This  is  an  obvious  early  instance  in  curating  unofficial 
markup. Encyclopedias lack street appeal, however, and one like 
Semapedia could be appropriated by anyone generating a smartcode for some other site, although a Google search for "Semapedia abuse" still yielded a null result in 2012. 

Instead,  recent  competition  in  applied  electronic  tagging 
tends to focus on RFID (radio frequency identification), with its 
lucrative  advantages  in  supply  chain  management,  especially 
amid the huge growth of merchandise logistics in China.26 Thus, 
in  the  spring  of  2008,  Walmart  began  charging  its  suppliers  a 

 7  $  *  *  ,  1   *    7   +   (    &   2   0   0   2   1   6      |        
small fine for each palette of goods not tagged with RFID. On a 
smaller scale, Avery Dennison, the maker of the now historically 
significant  "Hello,  My  Name  Is________"  sticker,  now  also 
operates in "RFID Labeling Solutions."27

Social thinkers rightly shun RFID for how it reifies everyday 
data  surveillance. With RFID on your passport  or transit pass, 
no longer do officials have to ask you for some ID; they can just 
scan  for  it.  When  coupled  with  data  mining  techniques,  data 
surveillance leads to socially corrosive behavioral tactics, whether 
on the part of marketers, police, or interpersonal networks. For 
many  years,  esteemed  futurist  Bruce  Sterling  kept  an  "arphid 
watch,"  which  cataloged  the  scary  realities  of  tracking  living 
things, possibly even errant humans, in some cases, by means of 
implanted Verichips.28

For  a  taste  of  social  fiction,  in  which  RFID  plays  a  more 
innocent role at tagging, it might help to take a moment to question that most widely assumed social act: web posting. Instead, 
imagine if there were nothing server-side. For instance, a system 
of RFID tags, local flash memory, and off-the-shelf reader bracelets could house a threaded urban narrative on a specific theme, 
say  ethnic  history,  urban  botany,  or  architectural  preservation, 
and,  with  nothing  posted  centrally,  data  surveillance  would  be 
less likely, paranoia might abate, and participation could become 
more candid. To read a different topic, you would buy a different reader off the rack at a local store. That does seem difficult to 
imagine. Naturally, the temptation would exist to gather all this 
lore, online in a box on a server farm outside town. Where does 
that temptation come from? Would there ever be counterexamples? Under what circumstances of noncriminal, nonofficial tagging would server-side posting become taboo?

        |        $   0   % ,  (  1  7     &   2   0   0   2   1   6

Many  technologists  are  now  working  on  a  more  viable 
development:  "augmented  reality"  (AR).  This  expression  has 
been around for at least twenty years, commercially viable products began to appear in the last five, and the prospects for explosive growth seem quite serious. The basic idea is certainly one of 
tagging. Different technologies determine how those tags overlay 
onto  the  visual  field.  The  simplest  way  combines  tagging  with 
the use of orientation chips (GPS, compass, plus accelerometer) 
now  included  in  smartphones.  When  introduced  on  the  first 
Android devices in 2008, this combination led to a first wave of 
augmented reality platforms, such as Layar and Wikitude, which 
popularized  the  expression  "reality  browser,"  and  which  began 
what soon became a flood of local apps. Unlike the use-anywhere 
apps  that  have  proliferated  over  smartphone  networks,  these 
local apps tend to be use-someplace ones, and can therefore be 
even more numerous. Right now, this new medium is changing 
too  quickly  for  a  print  publication to  follow  (just  search  "augmented reality apps" next time you need a guide in an unfamiliar 
town).

To achieve the spirit of frameless displays and palpable augmentation  takes  much  better  tracking  and  image  registration 
that  holding  your  smartphone  up  to  a  city  scene  can  provide. 
The  technology  has  been  around  in  military  and  emergency 
response operations in the form of heads-up displays on windshields  or  eyeglasses.  As  of  2011,  Google  announced  plans  to 
introduce  a  fashionable  consumer  device  in  the  form  of  wraparound eyeshades. (Many a technofuturist believes the handheld 
smartphone  is  just  a  clumsy  stage  on  the  way  to  better  wearables.)  With  respect  to  visual  attention,  heads-up  and  registration both mean not having to look away from the scene for the 

 7  $  *  *  ,  1   *    7   +   (    &   2   0   0   2   1   6      |        
annotation--no looking a few degrees downward at your smartphone, for example. Tracking means that the alignment follows 
your gaze quickly enough. This tends to reinforce a bias toward 
attention as selective visual gaze. If, on the other hand, the overlay becomes too immersive, as happened in many head-mounted 
goggles of the past, the disconnect between visual saturation and 
embodied  systems  of  haptic  orientation  will  quickly  produce 
simulation  sickness.  This  is  not  so  simple  as  walking  around 
with an iPod.

Local  content  for  augmented  reality  overlays  quickly  followed themes from more conventional guidebook technologies: 
local  restaurants,  histories  of  local  landmarks,  and  thematic 
walks  to  take.  Architects  took  note  of  the  prospect  to  overlay 
photographs of past and future conditions onto current views of 
the  city.  In  2011,  MetaIO,  a  pioneering  AR  company,    introduced  a  three-dimensional  rendering  technology  for  building 
urban augmented reality applications, such as for showing past 
or future buildings in context. Elsewhere, most of the early work 
has used FlickR images.  Compared to other things to do with a 
smartphone, these seemed like ways to tune in rather than out.

With such prospects in mind, this inquiry next moves from 
positional  tags  to  image  overlays.  To  cover  the  world  in  electronic  images  may  be  neither  possible  nor  desirable.  To  fill 
heads-up fashion eyewear with such images (at least where able 
to  do  so  without  causing  sensory-motor  disconnect)  has  the 
advantage that fewer messages might crowd physical space to be 
seen by everyone. 

Location-based  media  in  varying  degrees  of  augmenting 
reality  have  grown  from  a  curiosity  to  a  big  business.  Geodata 
support  enterprises  in  environment,  infrastructure,  logistics, 

        |        $   0   % ,  (  1  7     &   2   0   0   2   1   6
social  services,  security,  and  more.  The  geospatial  web  increasingly collects and delivers these managed data on demand, often 
to the very places they document. Embodied computation gathers and distributes these feeds in uncanny ways. Design conferences  such  as  Lift  and  Where  2.0  feature  the  latest  blogjects, 
mashups, and distributed narrative installations. Research societies  focus  on  specific  technologies  such  as  positioning,  sensing, 
embedding,  displaying,  and  ad  hoc  networking,  among  many 
others; some even defend the electronic commons.

Many  of  these  rapidly  sharing  domains  share  assumptions 
about ubiquity and mobility that raise deeper cultural concerns, 
chiefly  about  privacy  and  surveillance,  but  about  many  other 
things  too.  For  instance,  how  does  so  much  personalization 
recast  citizenship  or  civility?  What  kinds  of  information  best 
belong in one place and not everywhere? How might augmented 
reality media help document and conserve material and energy 
flows? Does ambient connectivity enhance or distract from environmental awareness and participation? The field of urban computing has emerged to explore these concerns.

Because the adoption rate of mobile handheld communication surpasses that of cars or television, it is rightly considered the 
most  transformative  urban  infrastructure  of  the  day.  Mobile 
applications  of  the  geospatial  web--not  always  for  positional 
wayfinding as geodata industries too quickly assume--thus tend 
to  dominate  artistic  and  academic  investigations.  Agendas  in 
social navigation and environmental management also emerge. A 
bottom-up  surveillance  (sousveillance)  campaign  may  flag  locations where surveillance cameras are active. More ambitious sousveillance may try to reverse corporate greenwashing by exposing 
cultural offenses.

 7  $  *  *  ,  1   *    7   +   (    &   2   0   0   2   1   6      |        
Tagging thus crosses from personal territorial marking into 
electronic art and technological design. When a large new field 
grows  up around  a given focus, some of  its smaller, less  dominant aspects may help shed light on its new outlooks. For example,  to  question  ubiquity,  it  helps  to  study  the  situated.29  To 
question  mobility,  it  helps  to  study  fixity,  to  look  at,  say,  the 
expressive  urban  material  constraints  that  rude  young  aerosol 
tagging  ignores.  And  thus  also,  to  question  the  spellbinding 
high-tech complexity of handheld social networking, it helps to 
consider low-tech and sometimes antisocial tagging.

 $ Z D U H Q H V V  R I  D  & R P P R Q V
In  the  literature  of  the  commons,  there  exists  a  well-known 
trope on tagging, "the `I' and the `it,'" first advanced by urban 
sociologist Richard Sennett in his 1990 book, The Conscience of 
the  Eye.  Does  a  youngster  spray  painting  a  subway  car  in  the 
Bronx  see  that  subway  car?  Sennett  recalled  New  York  in  the 
1970s: "The scale of this graffiti was what made the first impression:  there  was  so  much  of  it.! .! .! .  The  kids  were  indifferent, 
however, to the general public, playing to themselves, ignoring 
the presence of other people using or enclosed in their space.!.!.!. 
Transgression  and  indifference  to  others  appeared  joined  in 
these simple smears of self, and with a simple result. The graffiti 
were treated from the first as a crime."30 Whereas a tagger  just 
shouts "I," the "it" expresses the presence of others, past, present,  and  future  through  the  material  forms  and  constraints  of 
the  city.  There  are  limits  to  personalization.  Working  with 
external  circumstances  that  result  from  the  presence  of  others 
pushes you to a higher level, and that is an important aspect of 
urbanism. The aggregate of these material expressions constrains 

        |        $   0   % ,  (  1  7     &   2   0   0   2   1   6
each  individual  contribution.  To  Sennett,  whose  more  recent 
work on craft affirms  this outlook, an artist  working  in a  civic 
capacity does indeed see this material commons and lets it shape 
his  or  her  intentions  and  expressions,  through  which  the  city 
becomes a medium.

To sense a cultural accumulation can be the first step toward 
recognizing  a  commons.  The  mature tagger  can see  the city  as 
the  cumulative  state  of  many  people  presenting  themselves  to 
one another. Acts of tagging can add to the understanding of the 
city as commons, rather than detract from it. For example, in an 
early instance of public awareness graffiti and ambient ecofeedback, Eve Mosher's HighWaterLine (2007; figure 6.7) chalked 

      Public service: line chalking as tagging. Eve Mosher, HighWaterLine, 2007. Photo: Hose Cedeno.

 7  $  *  *  ,  1   *    7   +   (    &   2   0   0   2   1   6      |        

the  10-feet-above-sea-level  contour  through  the  most  densely 
built parts of New York. No degree of augmented reality tagging 
has quite the impact of old-fashioned chalking.

Ideas  of  the  commons  often  resurface  in  this  inquiry.  We 
must return to them with respect to networked urban resources, 
with respect to environmental history of information, and with 
respect  to  attention  itself.  They  raise  fundamental  questions 
about civility, the distracted urban citizen, and the public good. 

Between  the  age-old  extremes  of  transgressive  graffiti  and 
official  proclamations,  urban  markup  forms  a  new  middle 
ground (figure 6.8). More persistent, interlinked, and filterable 
than  graffiti,  but  more  improvisatory,  narrowly  themed,  and 

      Toward a new epigraphy.

        |        $   0   % ,  (  1  7     &   2   0   0   2   1   6
socially engaging than official signage, the tags now appearing in 
location-based  media  invite  consideration  as  a  genre  in  themselves.  Do  they  invite  a  new  epigraphy?  What  does  electronic 
tagging do for the upkeep and valuation of physical commons? 

        7 $ * * , 1 *  7 + (  & 2 0 0 2 1 6
   0 D L Q  L G H D       1 H Z  F X O W X U D O  P L G G O H  J U R X Q G   E H W Z H H Q  R I I L F L D O  
     L Q V F U L S W L R Q V  D Q G  W U D Q V J U H V V L Y H  J U D I I L W L

   & R X Q W H U D U J X P H Q W     6 H P L R W L F V  K D V  E H H Q  W K H U H   G R Q H  W K D W
   . H \  W H U P V     7 D J J L Q J   H S L J U D S K \
   : K D W  K D V  F K D Q J H G     7 D J V  F D Q  E H  I L O W H U H G  D Q G  O L Q N H G
   & D W D O \ V W     5 L V H  R I  O R F D W L R Q  E D V H G  P H G L D
   5 H O D W H G  I L H O G     ( Q Y L U R Q P H Q W D O  J U D S K L F V  Z D \ V K R Z L Q J
   2 S H Q  G H E D W H     : L O O  D Q \ R Q H  F X U D W H  X U E D Q  W D J V "

 

  ) U D P H V  D Q G  ) D F D G H V
Everyone knows where attention goes: to all those glowing rectangles. So where a general history of information might explore 
how  digital  displays  have  superseded  print,  an  environmental 
history  of  information  explores  how  they  have  proliferated  in 
physical  space,  as  when  screens  cover  whole  building  facades. 
Digital displays now number in the billions. According to Displaybank,  already  nearly  half  a  billion  large-area  TFT  LCD 
(thin-film transistor liquid crystal display) panels ship from east 
Asia  in  a  single  year,  as  do  more  than  a  billion  small-format 
LED  panels  for  cameras  and  smartphones.1  Then,  besides  the 
billion  or  more  smartphones  being  carried  around,  billions  of 
other displays are being built into everyday life: at points of sale, 
outside meeting rooms, on parking meters; as electronic paper, 
data  murals,  electronic  billboards,  huge  media  facades.  At  a 
baseball park, the crowd watches the larger-than-life close-ups of 
itself  on  the  JumboTron,  more  than  it  watches  the  game.  At 
street  level,  a  hyperlocal  events  site  such  as  EveryBlock  takes 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
photo  sharing  from  the  web  to  the  sidewalk,  supplanting  the 
now obsolete newspaper and recalling the town bulletin boards 
of  former  times,  which  existed  well  into  the  twentieth  century 
(figure 7.1).

Picture a car pulling in for some gas. Both the car and the 
gas pump have a video screen, where ten years ago they did not. 
The  kids  in  the  backseat  have  screens  of  their  own,  as  if  the 
world going by is no longer worth watching. A kiosk inside the 
express  mart  has  several  touch  screens  for  the  sole  purpose  of 
selling lottery tickets. This frees the attendant to watch a bank of 
security monitors instead. A television, placed up high atop the 
coolers  next  to  the  Buddha  figurine  (as  if  both  sentimental 

      Bulletin boards at street level: Boston Globe war map, 1944 (Getty Images).

  )   5 $  0   (   6    $  1   '      ) $   &   $ '   (   6      |        
totems  of  past  cultural  tradition),  is  always  on  though  seldom 
watched.2 The widescreen display above the snack rack gets more 
attention:  larger,  more  visible  from  the  entrance,  and  programmed with much higher production values, it presents a constant stream of mostly close-up, slow zoom-in shots of food.

Today fewer screens require you to sit down or to fix your 
gaze for more than a moment; fewer fill your field of view. Multiple screens may compete for your attention, or they may recede 
into  a  background  of  possibilities  for  shifting  attention.  The 
contents  of  their  fragmented  displays  change  across  a  greater 
range of time periods and in response to a greater range of circumstances  than  was  possible  before.  Not  all  displays  describe 
someplace else; sensing, networking, and embedded computing 
increase  the  capacity  for  displayed  images  to  be  about  current 
conditions in their immediate surroundings.

The ambient emerges from this visual abundance. In this it 
has  reached  a  new  stage.  Vision  famously  fragmented  in  the 
twentieth  century,  from  cubist  painting  at  its  start  to  clickable 
windows  by  its  end,  yet  it  mostly  kept  its  frame.  Indeed,  you 
could  identify  that  century  as  the  one  where  people  sat  down 
passively in front of framed, flickering screens. Now, as display 
technology  diversifies  in  size,  role,  and  use,  visual  culture  is 
accelerating and transforming once again. The more that images 
diversify, proliferate, and compete, the less any one of them may 
succeed at capturing your attention. Instead, they all fuse into a 
landscape, in which the perspective furnished by any one frame 
yields  to  a  new  kind  of  perspective  on  a  world  full  of  them. 
These new display  practices erode assumptions about the cinematic  nature  of  the  frame,  and  instead  belong  to  the  world  of 
architecture.

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
 7 K H  ) D F D G H  & R P P X Q L F D W H V
This inquiry into the history of information began from ancient 
inscriptions,  many  of  those  on  buildings.  In  a  way,  buildings 
were  the  first  mass  communication  medium.  Icons  in  architecture  served  to  teach  an  illiterate  laity  (figure  7.2).  In  much  the 
same way, textual inscriptions in architecture served to instruct a 
literate  public.  These  weren't  just  tags:  although  many  acted  as 
titles,  narratives,  schedules,  rolls,  and  proclamations,  they  also 
had  intrinsic  spatial  attributes  in  the  design,  layout,  and  placement of their characters. This was especially so in cultures whose 
prohibitions on figurative art led to expressive outlets in calligraphy, which itself had spatial attributes. Many of these communicative elements were intrinsic to facades. Picture a ruler speaking 
to  the  populace  from  the  portico  of  a  palace.  In  Istanbul,  the 
High Gate of the Topkapi Palace, from which the Ottoman sultans  and  their  delegates  spoke,  became  synonymous  with  their 
imperial power; both became simply known as the Porte. 

The words edify and edifice relate. Murals, illustrative ornament,  and  form  itself  all  made  architecture  communicate. 
Between  the  persistence  of  its  artifacts  and  the  relative  lack  of 
other media, architecture imposed ideas with a power that would 
now  be  difficult  to  imagine.  Too  few  histories  of  information 
acknowledge this architectural power; too few histories of information are environmental.

Even  a  history  of  writing  can  become  a  history  of  certain 
spatial dispositions.3 Buildings instructed not only directly with 
text and images, but also indirectly through the devotion implied 
in their workmanship and their permanent embodiment of messages.  The  extensive  embellishments  of  a  French  medieval 
church would have meant less if fabricated with machines rather 

  )   5 $  0   (   6    $  1   '      ) $   &   $ '   (   6      |        
      Facade that instructs: portal to medieval Church of Saint Trophime, Arles (twelfth century). Photo: Steffen Heilfort/Wikimedia Commons.
than by hand. Thus, in many stages of a building's history, distinctions between text, images, and ornament can seem to all but 
disappear.

How  buildings  have  been  transformed  but  never  made 
obsolete by successions of modern media, whether print, broadcast,  or  digital,  remains  a  perennial  theme  in  architectural  history  and  theory.  Now,  as  displays  ranging  from  tiny  touch 
screens to huge media facades provoke new kinds of controversy, 
many more disciplines beyond architecture have come to appreciate those histories.

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

Architectural  form  can,  of  course,  communicate  without 
any inscription. Thus a tripartite arch can stand for a particular 
military  victory.  Thus,  too,  the  massive,  imposing  facade  of  a 
building suggests permanence, and the spire of a church, ascendance.  The  great  stupa  of  Borobudur,  ornamented  with  some 
1,400  carved  stone  relief  panels  of  scenes  from  the  Sudhana, 
symbolizes the journey within, to be acted out by ascending its 
spiral pathway. Through form and not just annotation, architecture represents organizations to their constituencies. In the process,  it  also  tends  to  represent  the  cultural  circumstances  from 
which it arises.

Furthermore  as  postmodern  critics  took  such  delight  in 
reciting,  formal  signifiers  have developed a  visual code  of  their 
own, sometimes independently of their referents. The meaning 
of a sign comes as much from the circumstances of its creation or 
its reading as from what it refers to. In the free play of signifiers 
that results, the forest of signs becomes a delight in itself.

No wonder most buildings simply serve as carriers of overt, 
literal signage. This was true even before modern billboard technology and electric lighting. The brick side walls of many nineteenth-century buildings were covered with hand-painted signs. 
Although you can see relatively little evidence of signage in surviving portrayals of urban scenes before modern, literate times, 
such as Italian Renaissance paintings, other emblems of trades, 
perhaps  considered  inappropriate  to  include  in  precious  paintings,  appear  in  the  engravings  of  William  Hogarth  and  other 
artists of the eighteenth century. A major obstacle to compiling a 
complete  environmental history  of  information  is  how  little  of 
everyday streetscapes survives either in images or in print.

  )   5 $  0   (   6    $  1   '      ) $   &   $ '   (   6      |        
 * O R Z L Q J  ) R U P V
One chapter in a longer such history could dwell on the introduction  and  impact  of  electricity.  With  electrification,  walls 
were not only written on, but lit up as well. Fire, the medium of 
ancient signal technologies, has long been used to embellish or 
illuminate  cities,  at  least  in  part.  But  the  light  it  cast  didn't 
become integral to the urban scene until the advent of its much 
safer,  brighter,  more  evenly  distributed  successor,  incandescent 
lighting.

Famously,  at  Chicago's  World  Columbian  Exposition  of 
1893, when direct memories of the Great Chicago Fire of 1871 
were still quite fresh, the nighttime illuminations drew the largest  crowds.  Not  only  was  lighting  no  longer  coupled  with  the 
threat of conflagration, but it was now also fast, relatively cool, 
and unprecedentedly controllable.4

In the Jazz Age heyday that followed the spread of electrification,  urban nighttime  imagery became a  distinguishing cultural 
phenomenon. Many American cities touted their own versions of 
New York's luminous Great White Way. At street level, the signature  medium  became  neon.  Amid  the  financial  speculative 
boom and bust of the New York 1920s, one of the more easily 
traced historical threads is the rise and fall of the Claude Neon 
Company, whose stock took a path that today would look familiar to investors in many a 1990s dotcom. The crackle and glow of 
the neon tubes were attractors in themselves. The medium's lurid 
quality fit with the anomie of the age. As a harbinger of the ambient, it communicated without  need for message. "What,  in the 
end,  makes  advertising  so  superior  to  criticism?"  Walter  Benjamin  famously  quipped,  "Not  what  the  moving  red  neon  sign 
says, but the fiery pool reflecting it in the asphalt."5

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

Architectural landmarks, which had always anchored mental 
images  of  the  city,  now  appeared  in  what  was  literally  a  new 
light.  Lithographic  prints  that  were  posted  on  so  many  walls 
could  now  be  highlighted  for  emphasis  and  for  visibility  from 
greater  distances.  Thus  the  billboard  industry  took  new  form. 
New kinds of signs and facades integrated light in ways not possible  with  flames.  Buildings  became  beacons  (figure  7.3),  and 
skylines  became  more  sharply  defined  by  night  than  by  day. 
Some  of  these  beacons  displayed  weather  data,  like  those  of 
Pittsburgh's  Gulf  Tower,  for  example:  red  if  warming,  blue  if 
cooling, steady if clear, blinking if snow or rain.6

Later,  backlit  corporate  logos  assumed  such  prominence 
that nighttime skylines came to resemble groves of sign pylons. 
In some commercial landscapes, each of the seemingly pixilated 
features was itself a branded backlit sign. In the 1990s, star science fiction novelist Neal Stephenson named this phenomenon 
"loglo." "The loglo .!.!. is a body of electric light made of innumerable cells.!.!.!. Despite their efforts to stand out, they are all 
smeared together, especially at one hundred and twenty kilometers per hour."7

Glow stands out best against a large dark landscape. Starting in 
1936, Las Vegas pumped cheap hydroelectric power from Hoover 
Dam into a new kind of illumination spectacle amid the nighttime 
darkness of the Mojave Desert, a spectacle that eventually became 
America's largest tourist destination. The 1995 opening of the Fremont Street Experience pioneered the use of lights as pixels in large 
outdoor display surfaces, in this case, over the downtown neon belt 
already long known as "glitter gulch." Alas, this didn't endure long 
enough to earn historic preservation status. In 2004, a 12.5-megapixel LED array replaced the original incandescent grid.8

  )   5 $  0   (   6    $  1   '      ) $   &   $ '   (   6      |        
Today, many cities have designated signage districts, where 
advertisers are free to turn up the volume.9 Especially in the boom 
of urbanizing China, the greater the range of things emitting light 
in your field of view, the more uncanny the visual effect. Amid 
the anomie of a Hong Kong frontage road, electronic billboards 
take root. For a period in 2009, a four-story full-motion image of 
talking lips played in one such frame.

Not  only  in  signage  districts  but  also  through  everyday 
design neglect in office towers  and parking  lots, so much light 
gets  spilled  that  many  cities  now  recognize  and  regulate  light 
pollution. Some neighborhoods even restrict the use of the lowly 
boxed backlit sign.10 This is a topic worth taking up later, as an 
instance of governing the ambient. But, for now,  consider one 
extreme genre of digital display: the electronic billboard.

Little  seems  ambient  about  a  fifty-foot  LED  image.  Few 
electronic billboards go up for civic reasons. Few invite the kinds 
of imperceptibly slow patterning that could make so prominent 
a  surface  pleasant  to  live  with.  Instead,  today's  electronic  billboards rival texting while driving as exemplars of dangerous distraction.  Studies  indicate  sharply  greater  safety  risks  when  a 
driver's gaze goes off the road for more than two seconds. As a 
matter of policy, many cities have banned full-motion billboards. 
Many have compromised by allowing electronic billboards that 
only  flip  fixed  images.  Thus  California  requires  four  seconds 
between  frames,  and  many  states  require  eight.  Yet  each  such 
change creates a visual event that can be seen from a distance of 
ten miles or more.11

Sa~o Paulo, a city seldom cited for its visual harmony, banned 
billboards  outright  in  2007,  at  least  in  particular  zones  that 
became  the  direct  opposite  of  signage  districts.  Between  2007 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
      Building as beacon: Metropolitan Life tower, New York City, 1905. Photo: Jessie Tarbox Beals (Schlesinger Library, Harvard).

  )   5 $  0   (   6    $  1   '      ) $   &   $ '   (   6      |        
      Noteworthy recent large-scale media facade: King's Road Tower, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia (CITILED). Photo: courtesy of Alberto Ramon, CITILED.
        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
and 2009, nearly 20,000 billboards were taken down. The global 
advertising  industry  responded  with  alarm  at  this  threat.  The 
ban, though under reconsideration, was still holding as of 2012.

Los Angeles, the capital of cinema, surely loves a lit screen. 
Although famous for hilltop views of its grid of glowing avenues 
receding  to  the  horizon,  the  city  emits  far  fewer  lumens  per 
capita than Las Vegas and has, as yet, no signage districts on a 
par with Tokyo's. Nevertheless, having served as inspiration and 
site  for  that  infamously  prescient  work  of  glowing  dystopia, 
Blade Runner (1982), Los Angeles is now a poster child for billboard  regulation.  As  thousands  of  billboards  convert  from 
printed vinyl to LED arrays, neighborhood associations and city 
council members have taken exception. In 2009, the city called a 
moratorium on new billboards. KCET, a local viewer-supported 
television  station  ran  an  expose',  "Billboard  Confidential,"  that 
identified  Los  Angeles  as  the  "illegal  billboard  capital  of  the 
world,"  and  that  explained  the  process  by  which  advertisers 
silenced  politicians  by  providing  copious  free  advertising.12  By 
the  time  slowly  enforced  regulations  required  the  owners  to 
remove  a  billboard,  they  had  restarted  the  process  in  another 
part of town.

 0 H G L D  ) D F D G H V
What  happens  when  huge  electronic  displays  become  a  persistent part of physical architecture? Jakarta has claimed what as of 
2009 was the tallest fac,ade to be programmably illuminated, for 
the Grand Indonesia Tower at fifty-seven stories; as well as the 
longest (as of 2012) LED screen yet realized, in the Taman Anggrek  mall  at  over  eleven  hundred  feet.13 As  of  2012,  the  tallest 
realized full LED display in the Middle East was on the King's 

  )   5 $  0   (   6    $  1   '      ) $   &   $ '   (   6      |        
Road Tower in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, at twenty-six stories high 
(figure  7.4),  and  imaginatively  programmed  with  a  variety  of 
artistic,  civic  and  commercial  images.14  From  projects  such  as 
these, it seems clear that media facades, the big attention seekers 
of the electronic world, belong to an architecture for the age of 
YouTube.  Instead  of  designing  for  still  photographs  in  glossy 
magazines, the owners and architects of the twenty-first-century 
design for one-minute video clips going viral on the Internet.

Media  facades  became  especially  noteworthy  around  the 
time of the 2008 Beijing Olympics, whose features included the 
glowing  Voronoi  tessellation  of  the  natatorium,  and  the  LED 
proof  of  concept  GreenPix  Zero  Energy  Wall  (figure  7.5a). 
LEDs  integrate  well  with  tiled  skins  such  as  the  recently  completed  Iluma  building  in  Singapore  (figure  7.5b),  which  combines display with a breathable mesh of polycarbonate polygons, 
overlaid  outside  a  conventional  structural  facade.  This  escapes 
the rectangular frame. The media facade artists of realities:united 
explained  how  they  emphasize  that  any  particular  building  is 
"not a monitor" (not that one anyway).15

Media  facade  technologies  have  certainly  been  advancing, 
most notably in transparency, which besides letting the inhabitants see out, also allows the form of the facade and its screens to 
remain  visible  when  the  display  is  turned  off  (or  it  eventually 
wears  out).  In the  years  just before  2010, the  first  widely  used 
technology  for  transparent  media  facades  was  MediaMesh, 
which originated in Germany.16 Integrating rows of LEDs into 
latticed metal tubes mounted like a sunshade over the structure 
of  a  facade  (figure  7.5c),  MediaMesh  is  a  screen  in  the  older 
architectural sense of that word, and not the prevailing cinematic 
or digital norm. Taking the form of a lattice rather than a panel, 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
      Media fac,ade surfaces. 

(a) GreenPix Zero Energy 

Wall, Beijing, Simone Giostra 
& Partners, 2008. Photo: 
courtesy of Simone Giostra.

(b) Crystal Mesh fac,ade, 
Iluma center, Singapore, 
realities:united, 2009. Photo: 
courtesy of Jan Edler. 

(c) MediaMesh technology, up 
close. Photo: courtesy of AG4.

  )   5 $  0   (   6    $  1   '      ) $   &   $ '   (   6      |        
it  combines  material  and  computational  elements  in  a  refreshingly simple way. In perhaps its most widely known early application,  in  Milan,  for  the  2007  renovations  of  the  Arengario 
Museum  on  the  Piazza  del  Duomo,  MediaMesh  encased  the 
scaffolding  that  regularly  surrounds  European  cultural  monuments  during  maintenance  (figure  7.6),  displaying  supersized 
images  of  supermodels  from  the  world  of  fashion  advertising. 
The Milan installation thus drew a clear contrast between architectural embellishment and framed display.

Scale in space affects how an image reads: it reads differently 
on a huge scale, a personal scale, or a tiny, postage-stamp scale. 
An image that is larger than your body, and perhaps too large to 
see whole, reads differently than one you can hold in your hand. 
Huge  scale  makes  close-up  images  uncanny:  the  smaller  the 
object and closer the shot, the stranger the effect when displayed 
very large. The effect draws focus onto the object instead of its 
scene,  and  further  reduces  your  awareness  of  the  frame.  Thus, 
instead of suspension of disbelief, which sitting before a framed 
perspective  always  involves,  the  effect  is  "out  of  scene,"  or 
disorienting.

Scale in time also affects how an image reads. A transitory 
image  reads  differently  than  an  enduring  one.  An  image  that 
changes  continuously  with  a  natural  cycle,  like  the  shadows 
crossing  a  facade  over  the  course  of  an  afternoon,  reads  differently than one that imposes its own orchestrations of time and 
transitional effects. The ambient display, no longer constrained 
by  the  short  time  frames  of  broadcast,  need  not  jump  around 
like television programming, and could, for instance, operate on 
a weeklong, barely perceptible visual cycle. Building facades have 
the  opportunity  to  do  things  over  days,  weeks,  and  years  that 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
YouTube clips, television ads, and drive-by electronic billboards 
cannot.

So despite the huge range of controversy surrounding media 
facades, the main argument seems simple enough. Media facades 
should behave differently than cinematic frames, and over longer 
time cycles than most video productions. They may sometimes 
work  best  without  pictorial  images.  Because  almost  any  new 
technology is used to do the same old things at first, the owners 
of media facades mostly treat them like billboards, museum banners, or video screens, in other words as frames for other genres 
of  visual  communication,  and  (so  far)  too  seldom  as  genuine 
extensions of architecture. 

      An early MediaMesh installation, Milan, 2007 (AG4 + GKD). Photo: courtesy of GKD. 

  )   5 $  0   (   6    $  1   '      ) $   &   $ '   (   6      |        
 : L Q G R Z   6 F U H H Q   ) U D P H   ) D F D G H
An inquiry into attention and an environmental history of information  share  a  common  interest  in  apertures.  A  frame  sets  its 
contents apart from their surroundings, to be viewed through an 
opening in some different way, often in some different perspective,  as  if  through  a  lens;  from  one  space  to  another,  as  if 
through a window; and perhaps with some filtration of light, as 
if through a screen. Consider these openings as attention devices 
in architecture.

In architecture, a simple, well-placed opening frames a view, 
regulates the flow of sound, light, and air, and dramatizes passage  from  one  space  to  another.  As  Le  Corbusier  famously 
pointed out, the window is one of the best themes by which to 
approach  the  history  of  architecture.17  The  most  compelling 
windows  connect  contrasting  worlds:  an  office  and  garden,  an 
operations booth and factory floor, a prison inmate and visiting 
spouse, a warm bedroom and a winter storm. Thus an English 
window seat provides a way to be both indoors and outdoors in 
rare  fair  weather  in  a  climate  that  discourages  the  building  of 
patios and loggias. Where the spaces on two sides of an opening 
differ  in  appearance,  conduct,  privilege,  ownership,  or  atmosphere, the physical portal remains the most vivid framed threshold of all. By contrast, there is little so regrettable about modern 
building as the loss of windows that open.

The  screen  means  something  different,  and  often  more 
active, than the frame. A screen (often in the form of shutters or 
blinds) can be quietly gratifying to reconfigure on demand, and 
across  daily  and  seasonal  cycles.  Classical  Chinese  architecture 
made remarkably effective use of open lattice screens, for example.  Today  a  smart  green  building  skin  adaptively  responds  to 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
changes in the weather. Of course, a facade might also serve as a 
video  display  device,  a  screen  in  the  more  usual  sense  of  the 
word. Imagine the word screen as a verb: in more general use, to 
screen  can  be  to  showcase,  to  shield,  to  filter,  or  to  hide.18  In 
building, to screen usually means to mask or filter sun, wind, or 
just the views occupants have of one another.

A  facade  fills  a  view,  enduringly,  often  inescapably,  in 
embodied  space.  Like  a  face,  it  can  express,  edify,  impose,  or 
mask.  In  some  uses,  facade  implies  a  false  appearance  to  hide 
behind.  Because  a  facade  may  bear  inscriptions,  whether  in 
stone, calligraphy, fresco,  flyposting, neon, or LED meshes, its 
full  extent  also  becomes  a  frame.  Traditionally,  architectural 
composition  emphasized  both  the  facade  and  openings.  This 
made the facade a two-way viewing device.

Today when the word window more usually means a frame 
for  a  task  that  appears  on  a  screen,  it  is  worth  taking  note  of 
these  related  constructs  of  openings.  Whether  in  architecture, 
graphical user interfaces, photography, cinema, or their combinations,  the  aperture  has  many  vital  stages  in  the  history  of 
information.  For  centuries,  the  architectural  contexts  of  these 
apertures  dominated  visual  culture.  Then  came  the  ascent  of 
codex  books,  camera  exposures,  and  cinematic  screening  as 
frames. For the last century, cinematic screening has dominated: 
the  viewer  is  still,  the  frame  is  generally  undivided,  the  screen 
lights up, and the image is seen through its moves. But now, as 
new  display  technologies  flood  the  world,  a  new  visual era  has 
arrived.  Metaphorically,  the  frame  has  shattered  into  so  many 
fragments,  each  of  which  is  itself  a  visual  instrument.  Painters 
have  long  understood  how  to  manipulate  such  multiplicity  of 
projected  vision,  of  course.  Nearly  a  century  before  stacks  of 

  )   5 $  0   (   6    $  1   '      ) $   &   $ '   (   6      |        
virtual desktop windows, or the layering of the city with glowing 
rectangles, the cubists vividly fragmented space.

One core belief in media studies is that when a frame fixes a 
perspective, it also fixes a cultural position. The frame represents 
conventions of suspending disbelief. To question the frame is to 
expose those conventions. Postmodern scholarship learned to go 
beyond the visual genre to which the frame belonged, for example,  into  the  politics  or  literature  that  influenced  the  frame's 
visual  production.  In  today's  information  technology,  such 
cross-readings  and  metacontexts  accumulate  nearby  or  may  be 
summoned instantaneously. Although in any age a master such 
as  Vela'zquez  or  Vertov  could  question  the  frame  from  within, 
digital media have generally made it easier, indeed normal, to do 
so  from outside,  in  close proximity,  by quick  juxtapositions  of 
ubiquitous media.

Among  recent  works  of  visual  culture  theory,  none  has 
looked quite so literally at the frame itself, nor so thoroughly at 
the frame's relations to windows and screens, as Anne Friedberg's 
rich  history,  The  Virtual  Window  (2006).19  Beginning  with 
Renaissance  architect  Leon Battista  Alberti's  oft-cited  metaphor 
of  the  window  as  perspectival  aperture  ("I  draw  a  rectangle  of 
whatever size I want, which I regard as an open window through 
which  the  subject  to  be  painted  is  seen")20  and  closing  on  the 
multiple  apertures  of  Microsoft  Windows,  Friedberg  found  an 
"age of windows" in which sitting  before  the frame's fixed perspective became normal, and for which cinema bore out "in retrospect, the remarkable historical dominance of the single-image, 
single-frame paradigm as in intransigent visual practice."21

The  frame,  whose  general  use  arose  concurrently  with  the 
use  of  easels,  optics,  and  perspectival  projections,  comes  to 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
represent all such artifice. "The exact origins of the picture frame 
are somewhat indistinct, but the frame became a component element  of  the  painting  when  the  painting  became  independent 
from the wall," Friedberg  observed.22  A frame creates  an interpretive context by setting its contents aside from their surroundings. This tends to privilege the contained, more like a treasure 
box than a window. A frame is an object that makes its contents 
an object. "The frame suggests a common position for viewing: 
separate from but facing it."23

Next  comes  the  insight  to  juxtapose  two  separate  images 
that invoke the same feeling, through montage, associative recall, 
hypermedia, framelessness; this is the core of media studies. In 
his  influential  Language  of  New  Media  (2002),  Lev  Manovich 
asserted the essential construct of digital media to be the composite24--rather than simply serving as a transparent frame, digital media now layer, substitute, and recompose.

Historical perspective on the multiperspectival paradigm is 
"postcinematic,"  an  expression  for  which  Friedberg  could  well 
be credited. The cultural distance necessary for such perspectives 
has  quickly  grown  with  the  proliferation  of  virtual  windows--
first on the desktop graphical user interface, then with the handheld  and  situated  gadgets  of  pervasive  computing,  now  at 
larger-than-life  scales  to  integrate  with  the  built  environment, 
and  using  amorphous  display  techniques  sometimes  without 
screens at all.

 1 H Z  6 X U I D F H V   $ P R U S K R X V  ' L V S O D \ V
Thus  the  looking  glass  has  shattered,  with  each  of  its  shards 
becoming  an  instrument  in  itself.  Each  now  assumes  unique 
features  and  reflects  specific  tastes;  together,  the  shards  are 

  )   5 $  0   (   6    $  1   '      ) $   &   $ '   (   6      |        
experienced  in  a  montage  that  is  again  situated  in  built  space. 
Today,  the  proliferation  of  virtual  windows  not  only  moves 
beyond the desktop, but also beyond the static frame. Advances 
in  display  technology  diversify  the  contexts  and  formats  in 
which  visual  information  may  appear.  Beside  architecture 
appearing  in  projected  movies,  movies  (and  other  projections) 
appear  displayed onto architecture, as in the works of eminent 
artists  such  as  Rafael  Lozano-Hemmer.  For  more  casual  purposes  a  projector  can  fit  in  your  pocket  and  display  onto  any 
nearby  surface,  such  as  a  colleague's  shirt.  Sometimes  fabrics 
themselves  serve  as  display  devices;  by  means  of  conductive 
thread, eTextiles already exist. 

So  far,  the  proliferation  of  display  possibilities  has  run  on 
flat  screen  technologies,  especially  liquid  crystal  display  (LCD) 
technology, which are still fairly expensive and largely confined 
to rectangles. It wasn't really possible with the cathode ray tube 
(CRT) screen, which took up too much space and filled most of 
a desk or table top; it couldn't be hung on a wall, much less in a 
smaller spot like a seat back in an airplane or car. The cultural 
appeal of the flat screen has become so powerful that you can't 
give CRT screens away--many reuse centers or charity dropoff 
points  simply  refuse  to  take  them.  Thus  considerable  anticipation surrounds the next stage of succession, from backlit rectangular panels to new forms of display.

Electronic inks don't glow, are visible at wider angles, and 
don't have to be refreshed as often as backlit LCDs, which makes 
them  much  better  suited  for  sustained  reading  of  still  text  and 
for  reading  in  reflected  natural  light.  Early  e-readers  such  as 
Kindle(R) were among the pioneers at bringing electronic inks to 
mass markets.25 It has helped that e-inks consume power only to 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
change, not to maintain, an image. Their slow refresh rate makes 
electronic  ink  displays  inappropriate  for  rapid  smooth  actions, 
like moving a cursor or playing a video or video game, which has 
helped  distinguish  e-ink  devices  from  more  general  graphical 
user interfaces (GUIs). Readers of literature gain peace of mind 
knowing  that  a  flash  clip  won't  jump  out  at  them  when  they 
turn the page. 

Reflective  displays  eliminate  backlighting  and  yet  support 
rapid  motion. Advances  in  LCD  technologies such  as  ChLCD 
(cholesteric  LCD)  display,  introduced  by  such  companies  as 
Kent  and  Magink,  work  on  scales  large  enough  for  billboards. 
And  because  reflective  LCDs  don't  emit  light,  reflective  LCD 
electronic  billboards  are  less  obtrusive.  Reflective  LCD  display 
technology  also  works  for  indoor  applications  of  arbitrary  size, 
by means of a system of stackable 7-inch tiles. By using reflected 
light,  wall-scaled  graphics  also  become  less  obtrusive.26  This 
works well on the intermediate scale of kiosks and exhibit design. 
It  allows  video  (which  so  many  people  seem  to  want)  to  play 
without luminance, which annoys neighbors. In another variant, 
combining LCD and LED technologies, Transflective(TM) displays 
use either reflected or emitted light depending on conditions.27 
This  provides  power  savings  by  day,  when  backlit  display  isn't 
necessary. It may also work well for e-books.

Relative to conventional backlit LCD, these new technologies consume less power. Thus, besides having less obtrusive display, they also have less obtrusive housings. In some cases, power 
consumption is low enough to run wirelessly, on small batteries 
or solar cells. Power is saved by replacing hungrier, earlier technologies, such as neon. In this, the most widespread opportunity 
is  to  replace  incandescent  city  lights,  such  as  the  ubiquitous 

  )   5 $  0   (   6    $  1   '      ) $   &   $ '   (   6      |        
yellow of sodium fixtures, with energy-conserving LED systems. 
Much like the replacement of gas-burning lamps with incandescent lighting a century ago, this transition not only reduces waste 
but also introduces new kinds of programmable control. When 
combined with lighter housings and wireless power, this lets an 
LCD/LED display go just about anywhere.

MIT  Media  Lab  called  it  "pixel  liberation."28  Whereas 
reflective  displays  escape  unwanted  glowing,  liberated  pixels 
escape  ubiquitous  rectangles.  This  provides  prospects  more  in 
abstract data display than in conventional pictorial imaging. As 
William Mitchell observed in 2006, "[LED technology] breaks 
down the traditional distinction between computer displays and 
lighting systems, and provides a new and very inexpensive way of 
visually defining and unifying urban public spaces."29

In a step toward participation, many new surface technologies  allow  for  touch.  Large-scale  multitouch  screens  let  whole 
groups  engage  in  visual  display  much  as  the  far  smaller  touch 
screens of smartphones do individuals. The Helsinki City Wall 
project (2008), one of the first to apply multitouch in a sidewalk 
setting (figure 7.7) served as a conversational site.30 The technology more often appears indoors and horizontally, as on exhibit 
tables in museums.

Multitouch  floors  provide  the  more  bodily-orienting  sense 
of  engagement  that  comes  from  walking  on  something.  As  far 
back as the 1960s, interface pioneers such as Myron Krueger recognized  this  condition.  Early  twenty-first-century  prototypes 
from the dawning tangible media age applied iFloor technology 
to information access, such as in the Alexandra Institute's 2004 
project for the public library in Aarhus, Denmark.31

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
       Early public multitouch surface: City Wall, Helsinki, Helsinki Institute for Information Technology, 2007. Photo: courtesy of Giulio Jacucci.

Although windows have been the emphasis here, note that 
floors and ceilings also played much richer roles in architecture 
before print and electronic communication. Changes of material 
and  texture  in  floors  communicated  zones  and  protocols,  and 
the design and decoration of ceilings conveyed aspirations. It is a 
fundamental act of orientation to look up to something. Many 

  )   5 $  0   (   6    $  1   '      ) $   &   $ '   (   6      |        
cultures  have  built  this  into  their  architecture.  And  it  is  a  an 
impoverished  culture,  or  at  least  a  sign  of  poor  architecture, 
where people walk around without without looking up.32

Embodied orientation to a surface can affect how you read 
and make sense of that surface. Whether an image, text, abstract 
data display, ornament, or just well-composed building skin, an 
architectural  surface  isn't  just  visual.  Furthermore,  the  perceptions  and  mental  constructs  that  result  from  better-balanced 
sensory experience produce different, and possibly richer, spatial 
mental models of the sites of experience.33

Thus it seems fair, and perhaps quite culturally significant, 
to value urban landscapes of information more, and the particular  images  applied  to  buildings  less.  Advertising  supergraphics 
are  leading  the  wrong  way  culturally.  Still  photos  of  empty 
buildings for glossy magazines do no better. And, of course, the 
notion  that ornament,  signage,  or  data  systems  are  outside the 
scope of architecture now seems quite dated. Instead, the question becomes how all these visual systems aggregate.

 9 L V X D O  2 Y H U O R D G  5 H F R Q V L G H U H G
You might want new ways to look at this media-laden world. As 
the technological means for delivering superabundant stimuli keep 
expanding, so too must the attention skills for dealing with them. 

Vision always filters; human powers of visual selection prove 
quite  remarkable.  Yet it  is commonly  recognized that  involuntary  responses  exist,  especially  to  quick  movements  of  bright 
objects in the periphery. Although in the natural settings where 
vision evolved, those might be infrequently encountered predators  or  prey; instead  today  they are  incessant,  cognitively  engineered, attention-seeking, artificial annoyances.

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

Filtering depends on more than vision. Seeing is, of course, 
culturally conditioned. But today that conditioning has become 
much more technologically mediated, for example by explosive 
growth in the sharing of photos, or in the perpetual use of social 
media as a means of filtering. 

Nevertheless,  filtering  has  its  limits.  You  can  screen  out 
ultraviolet wavelengths with a good pair of sunglasses, but there 
is nothing you can wear, short of a blindfold, to screen out an 
electronic billboard. You can get up and walk away from a desktop  computer,  or  put  your  smartphone  away  in  your  bag,  but 
sometimes there is no way to escape an information landscape. 

Thus the ambient requires some governance. As inhabitable 
image formats diversify, so do the occasions and ways of reading 
them.  Much  as  the  twentieth  century  amplified  the  ability  to 
deliver active images within a  frame, so the  twenty-first is  well 
on its way toward creating landscapes of visual production, full 
of communications for someone else. In these, the process of filtering has increasingly been left to the viewer. For the web, social 
production  advocate  Clay  Shirky  has  called  this  "publish  first, 
filter later."34 But while the online world of hypertext has welldeveloped tools for filtering by those who think to apply them, 
the physical world of tagged and screen-laden cities does not. 

Physical  embodiment  also  invites  foraging.  Distinct  from 
searching,  where  you  know  specifically  what  you  are  after, 
browsing, where you are open to whatever might appear interesting, foraging moves among clusters of stimuli. Like a bear in a 
mountain meadow, who moves on to the next berry patch before 
finishing the  present  one, and  indeed  as  soon  as another  looks 
interesting, foraging in information media runs less on optimization  (the  best  berry  patch)  or  efficiency  (getting  every  berry) 

  )   5 $  0   (   6    $  1   '      ) $   &   $ '   (   6      |        
than on perceptions of sufficiency (plenty right here--or there). 
Distribution in physical space brings embodiment into this kind 
of attention. Foraging the city involves spatial navigation, rights 
of access, and interpersonal social distances. It also involves formulas  of  visual  cues  matched  to  target  populations;  modern 
marketing combines spatial sorting with cultural filtering. Consumers  avoid  overload  by  confining  themselves  to  familiar 
"brandscapes."35  Nevertheless  the  least  predictable  zones  of  the 
city are often the most interesting ones. Besides even in the most 
formulaic  settings,  advertisers  cannot  assume  that  anyone  is 
looking. 

Thus, as a way to imagine the degree of change wrought by 
the ascent of filtering, consider the oxymoron "unnoticed spectacle."  Much  of  mid-twentieth-century  critical  theory  assumed 
that, with radio and especially television being run by just a few 
centralized networks, most people would notice a single dominant feed and that "spectacle" would reflect how much of that 
feed was engineered as distraction, presumably for political purposes. As voiced best by Guy Debord, spectacle not only commanded  view  but  also  furnished  the  terms  of  viewing:  by 
providing the times, places, language, talking points, and subject 
matter for public attention, it was the perfect frame.

Today, so much has been made into spectacle that little of it 
amazes. So many channels exist that every group of viewers has 
one just to its liking. So many visual media exist that no single 
medium, not even television, nor electronic billboards, can claim 
command  of  its  viewers.  Recording,  fast-forwarding,  sharing, 
linking,  exposing,  rating,  bombing,  sousveilling,  and  so  many 
other  actions  of  many-to-many  communication  reduce  the 
chances for any one feed to be noticed. Although many people 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
remain  passive  captives  of  media  monocultures,  none  of  the 
former one-to-many channel owners can so confidently claim, as 
their  twentieth-century  counterparts  did,  that  "we"  think  this 
particular way or that. Even the most watched event of the year, 
whatever  that  may  be  for  a  particular  subculture,  is  watched 
alongside  several  others,  intermittently.  The  contents  of  each 
frame, engineered ever more crassly to capture attention, nevertheless fail to capture attention, which instead drifts and marvels 
at how, wherever you look, so many frames blink and glow. 

With  so  many  new  relations  among  windows,  screens, 
frames,  and  facades  now  filling  everyday  space,  watching  has 
become  less  important,  and  foraging  has  become  more  so. 
Having  more  options  improves  the  chances  that  you  will  find 
enough  interest somewhere. Often  you  can discover that without  the concentrated  effort of  dedicated  search.  You  work at  a 
lower level of detail, and a higher sense of drift. If there seems to 
be  enough  here,  you  might  be  open to  more  of  it,  and  scan  it 
more closely, or with more particular intent. You take cues from 
surroundings about what to be looking for. Context and sensibility intertwine.

The  ambient  is  such  a  relationship.  The  return  of  inscriptions to building scale recalls a time before framed apertures. To 
inhabit  a  patchwork  continuum  of  glowing  surfaces  is  to  look 
less at any one. To move among so many screens as an environment  in  itself  is  to  stop  less  often  before  any  one  of  them.  To 
enjoy their multiplicity as an embellishment of their place is to 
look less through any one of them as if a threshold to somewhere 
else. In the words of Stephenson: "Despite their efforts to stand 
out, they are all smeared together." 

  )   5 $  0   (   6    $  1   '      ) $   &   $ '   (   6      |        
        ) 5 $ 0 ( 6  $ 1 '  ) $ & $ ' ( 6
   0 D L Q  L G H D       ( [ S O R V L Y H  J U R Z W K  L Q  Q X P E H U   I R U P D W V   D Q G  F R Q W H [ W V  R I  
     V L W X D W H G  L P D J H V

   & R X Q W H U D U J X P H Q W     & R U S R U D W H  P H G L D  D Q G  V S H F W D F O H
   . H \  W H U P V     ) U D P H   J O R Z   D P R U S K R X V   S R V W F L Q H P D W L F
   : K D W  K D V  F K D Q J H G     3 H R S O H  P R Y H  D U R X Q G  Z L W K  D Q G  D P R Q J  G L V S O D \ V
   & D W D O \ V W     0 D Q \  Q H Z  G L V S O D \  W H F K Q R O R J L H V
   5 H O D W H G  I L H O G     9 L V X D O  F X O W X U H  W K H R U \
   2 S H Q  G H E D W H     6 K D U H G  Y L V X D O  H [ S H U L H Q F H "

 

 
 $ U F K L W H F W X U D O  $ W P R V S K H U H V

The ambient began as embrace by air, or as the ancients expressed 
it,  "aer  ambiens."  Now  many  fields  have  rediscovered  this 
embrace.  Air  itself  is  "in  the  air."  So  besides  all  those  tags  and 
screens as objects of attention, consider the ambient as something 
you  occupy,  with  fully  embodied  cognition.  The  built  world 
reshapes attention sensibilities not only through its configuration 
but also through atmospheric comfort. Architecture encloses air, 
conditions it, and, in the process, conditions attitudes too.

 & R P S R V L Q J  $ L U
As many inquiries into air now do, start with oxygen. Throughout the last decade, many thinkers have recited stories of Joseph 
Priestley's  discovery  (in  the  late  eighteenth  century)  that  air  is 
not  a  single  pure  element,  but  a  composition  that  includes 
oxygen.1  In  the  late  twentieth  century,  "Oxygen"  became  the 
name of an early MIT project on computing "as pervasive and 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
free  as  air."2  Later  that  idea  was  taken  up  by  the  European 
Union research agenda on ambient intelligence.3

Air  has  always  had  its  metaphors.  Traditional  myths  and 
legends held that fates were the exhalations of the gods. Illness 
was  believed  to  come  from  ill  winds  and  nocturnal  miasmas. 
Before knowledge of oxygen, combustion was thought to occur 
across a metaphysical  ether called "phlogiston." Air had  always 
been  fouled  by  fires;  anyone  could  see  as  much.  The  modern 
change was to make science and policy about it. Technological 
historians take interest when several fields simultaneously arrive 
at  workable  concern.  Air  was  one  of  these,  two  hundred  years 
ago;  and  today  it  has  become  so  again  in  new  ways.  Through 
technology,  humanity  now  engineers  air,  both  at  building  and 
planetary  scale.  Willis  Carrier,  the  pioneer  of  air-conditioning, 
called the former "manufactured weather." Today, at the latter 
scale, that expression has staggeringly different implications.

The philosopher Peter Sloterdijk traced the fear of technologically modified air to the poison gas attacks of World War I. 
In sociologist Bruno Latour's oft-cited paraphrase of Sloterdijk: 
"You are on life support, it's fragile, it's technical, it's public, it's 
political, it could break down--it is breaking down--it's being 
fixed, you are not too confident of those who fix it."4

Contrary to centuries of beliefs in the West, then, it  turns 
out the invisible stuff between visible things is of consequence. 
The upkeep of air is everyone's concern. Of course not everyone 
realizes this. Why else would people sit in their cars at an overlook point, with engines idling and windows rolled up on a perfect California day? But now, as planetary atmosphere becomes 
something for everyone to think about, the rediscovery of air has 
become a prominent cultural theme.

  $   5 &  +   ,   7   ( &  7   8   5 $  /      $   7   0   2   6   3   +   (   5   (   6      |        
 $ W P R V S K H U L F  $ U W V
In a parable for reconnection between the planet and the arts, a 
2008 retrospective on British romantic landscape painter J. M. 
W. Turner, thought to be the first to have written, "Atmosphere 
is my style,"5 called attention to luminous air as subject matter. 
That the skies were full of volcanic ash in 1816 made the sunsets 
Turner  dramatized  even more  dramatic. Though  just an  interesting circumstance for the artist, this event held far greater significance for viewers in 2008.

Air  can  be  subject  matter,  expression  can  be  atmospheric, 
and sometimes these two can converge. Many familiar examples 
exist  in  film,  whose  reliance  on  montage  seems  fundamentally 
atmospheric, and whose capacity for fast action cuts is so often 
abused that artistic restraint seems all the more memorable. Take 
Sergio Leone's Once Upon a Time in the West (1968), for example.  In  an  opening  scene  that  lasts  several  long  minutes,  two 
gunmen  sit  motionless  in  the  shade  of  a  railroad  station,  with 
only a creaking windmill and buzzing flies to be heard, as they 
wait for a train to arrive from great distance through the shimmering desert air.6

Whether you call it "atmospheric," "ambient," or "minimalist,"  work  that  refrains  from  jumpy,  noisy,  foreground  effects 
seems  ever  more  the  exception,  and  an  ever  more  necessary 
haven, in an age of attention-seeking overstimulation. Although 
this inquiry is not the place to unpack a critical aesthetic of the 
ambient  arts,  it  would  not  be  happening  without  those  arts. 
Embedded sensors, actuators,  and  computation have enabled  a 
new  aesthetic  genre  in  environmental  monitoring  (figure  8.1). 
The ambient arts have several ideas to offer on perception that 
are  worth  considering  here.  These  may  help  show  why  to 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
approach  the  question  of  attention  from  the  perspective  of 
architecture.

As  noted  in  the  chapter  on  embodiment,  Gernot  Bo"hme 
recast  aesthetics  into  a  general  theory  of  embodied  perception, 
where  "the  primary  `object'  of  perception  is  atmospheres."7 
Bo"hme asserted a basic postmodernist thesis: by reaching into all 
aspects of life, a new aesthetic departs from high art based on cultivated taste. "The primary task of aesthetics is no longer to determine what art is, and to provide means for art criticism, [but to 
describe] the full range of aesthetic work, which is defined generally as the production of atmospheres."8 Note how this cultural 
diffusion coincided with the scientific admission of "preontological"  cognition,  which,  in  turn,  led  to  the  current  emphasis  on 
"affect," that is, communication without overt messages. Bo"hme 
thus  traced  the  lineage  of  affect  to  Walter  Benjamin's  famous 

      Ambient sculptural display of outdoor air movement: Jason Bruges, Anemograph, Sheffield, 2006. Photo: Jason Bruges Studio.

  $   5 &  +   ,   7   ( &  7   8   5 $  /      $   7   0   2   6   3   +   (   5   (   6      |        
expression of "aura."9 Whereas aura was associated only with high 
art objects, however, affect is anywhere, and aggregate.

Twentieth-century  aesthetics  defined  an  atmosphere  as  an 
"overall mood produced by individually indiscernible moves in a 
medium." Thus an atmosphere may arise when many different 
things in a room share the incidental property of color. Whether 
in painting, film, or music, the twentieth-century arts generally 
moved  away  from  traditional  themes  and  icons  to  concentrate 
on the intrinsic physical traits of their particular mediums. For 
example, when Claude Debussy put aside conventions of classical exposition for an emphasis on the timbres of discrete sound 
events, it was considered atmospheric, and invited a new kind of 
attention.  For  this,  Debussy  is  often  credited  as  a  founder  of 
both ambient music and some of the first modern music.10

The high modernists of the mid-twentieth century stripped 
away  traditional  symbolism,  reducing  art  to  its  actual  surfaces. 
Visual  theorists  such  as  Gyo"rgy  Kepes  and  Rudolf  Arnheim 
addressed cognitive mechanisms directly, through the principles 
of gestalt psychology as they interpreted them, and visual artists 
often did so, too. This was especially evident in painting, where 
nonrepresentational  emphasis  on  the  paint  itself  pushed  the 
medium  toward  its  most  atmospheric  possibilities,  such  as  the 
floating color fields of Mark Rothko. In music, it led to patternand-process  pieces,  such  as  those  of  Terry  Riley.  Many  such 
works  came  to  be  known  as  "minimalist."  Although  this  label 
has been inappropriately applied to many phenomenological artists who didn't regard themselves as minimalist, it makes a point. 
Art has to do with the unnamed. It operates without ontology or 
semantics. This role became clear in the 1960s, for for example 
when  artists  challenged  the  boundary  between  sculpture  and 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
painting,  forcing  viewers  into  an awareness  of  the  space  of  the 
gallery  itself.  The  sculptor  Robert  Morris,  often  credited  with 
laying the theoretical groundwork of minimalism, once defined 
the mission of art as "maximum resistance to perceptual separation," a phrase that prefigures later formulations of atmospheric 
aesthetics.11 But fellow sculptor Donald Judd may be the artist 
most often mentioned when people are asked to name a minimalist today. To visit his installations in Marfa, Texas, remains 
an act of high fashion.

In her widely read book on the relations of art and cognitive 
neuroscience,  historian  and  critic  Barbara  Maria  Stafford  has 
explained  the  visual  arts'  move  beyond  illusory  tricks  (e.g., 
trompe  l'oeil  or  anamorphism)  to  a  richer  exploration  of  how 
the  brain  constructs  perceptions  of  environmental  coherence. 
For, as embodied knowledge theorists have come to explain, the 
brain  makes  use  of  objects  and  surroundings  to  construct, 
master, and maintain perceptual schemas that do not rise to the 
level of processed symbols and signs, but are instead experienced 
in  lower  neural  pathways.  Stafford  has  investigated  the  role  of 
images  in  these  constructs  and  the  power  of  some  patterns  to 
create,  not  merely  depict,  holistic  environmental  perceptions. 
She  has  explained  how  phenomenological  coherence  takes  the 
luminous works of artists such as Dan Flavin and James Turrell 
beyond  optical  deception  into  "unfurling  metaphysical  experience," or at the cognitive level, "neural holism."12

Atmosphere,  then,  goes  past  the  play  of  signs,  which  so 
overloads everyone, to a  more intrinsic kind  of information. It 
does  so  through  embodied  cognition,  which  works  well  at  the 
scale of built volumes.

  $   5 &  +   ,   7   ( &  7   8   5 $  /      $   7   0   2   6   3   +   (   5   (   6      |        
 $ U F K L W H F W X U D O  $ W P R V S K H U L Q J
As this inquiry has explored with respect to attention, embodiment  in  architecture  and  the  city  plays  important  cognitive 
roles.  Although  contextual  sensibilities  may  arise  from  natural, 
mythological,  or  networked  technological  configurations,  or  of 
course from personal and social affinities, the built environment 
also has influence. As noted in the chapter on fixity, architecture 
provides  mise-en-sce`ne  for  communications,  configures  the 
habitual  play  of  expertise,  and  can  help  to  restore  attentional 
capacities.  Yet  the  most  basic  role  of  building  is  to  provide 
atmospheric  comfort.  A  rediscovery  of  air  thus  invites  quite  a 
different way to think about the relationship of architecture and 
attention.

For  much  of  the  last  decade,  the  discipline  of  architecture 
has  turned  away  from  attention-seeking  novelties  in  digitally 
generated  form  toward  more  slowly  knowable  atmospheres  in 
space. Besides being a reaction to the rediscovery of air, this was 
also a reaction to the kinds of perceptual overload brought on by 
the rise of computers. Perhaps most welcome of all, a new interest in atmosphere was a reaction against the dulling uniformity 
of corporate buildings, where the only interesting place to look 
was your screen.

Surely the most emblematic work of that decade was by the 
Danish  phenomenological  artist  Olafur  Eliasson,  who  is  best 
known for The Weather Project installation (figure 8.2), at London's Tate Modern,  which by  some estimates had  two million 
visitors  over  its  six-month  run  (2003-04).  For  many,  The 
Weather Project signaled the emergence of designers willing to 
explore new topics in environmental installations, small climate 
objects,  and  physically  atmospheric  works.13  Eliasson  soon 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
      Olafur Eliasson, The Weather Project, London, 2003-04. Photo: Thomas Pintarec/Wikimedia Commons. 

  $   5 &  +   ,   7   ( &  7   8   5 $  /      $   7   0   2   6   3   +   (   5   (   6      |        
became  one  of  the  most  sought-after  installation  artists  alive.14 
In  her  2006  profile  of  him,  New  Yorker  critic  Cynthia  Zarin 
explained how Eliasson "was deeply affected by the work of the 
phenomenologist  philosophers,  especially  Edmund  Husserl--
with their emphasis on the individual experience of reality--and 
by  Lawrence  Weschler's  biography  of  Robert  Irwin,  Seeing  Is 
Forgetting  the  Name  of  the  Thing  One  Sees."15  (As  noted  in  the 
chapter  on  the  ambient,  Husserl's  phenomenology  lay  at  the 
foundations  of  embodiment.)16  The  Weather  Project  required 
the  participation  of  the  viewers  for  completion.  "Rather  than 
minimize  [the  great  height  of  the  hall],  Eliasson  doubled  it" 
visually,17  with  mirrors  on  the  ceiling;  he  made  the  space  outdoor-like with a giant disk of a sun and made it slow with a long 
cycle  of  clouds  from  mist  machines.  Viewers  would  lie  in  this 
space, sometimes for hours, sometimes losing perceptual separation between themselves, the setting, and the art, and sometimes 
even  forgetting  to  go  on  to  the  picture  galleries.18  Participants 
remember the project atmospherically, which may be why it can 
be  cited  so  often  without  becoming  a  cliche'.  Recall  Debussy's 
conception of atmosphere, where the effect  of the work at  any 
given moment can't be traced to any particular component. In 
The  Weather  Project,  viewers  couldn't  even  trace  the  effect 
externally, outside their participatory nonfocal attention.19

In other words, design practice can literally make sense by 
creating  phenomena  that  help  construct  signless  mental  representations. In an age where disembodied stimuli otherwise command an ever larger share of attention, atmospheric design can 
restore some cognitive balance.

Yet, for at least half a century, air has usually been designed 
to go unnoticed. A fully automatic environment is more efficient; 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
it means one fewer thing to think about. But now that creed gets 
called  into  question.  Uniformity  no  longer  seems  attainable, 
affordable,  healthy,  or  technologically  necessary.  Today's  sensor 
and actuator networks allow finer adaptations than were practical 
before.

Many  recent  works  in  architectural  atmosphere  emphasize 
these engineering prospects in themselves, without need for staging  in  grand  spaces  like  the  Tate  Modern.  Digital  production 
techniques allow unprecedentedly precise control over the composition  of  minimally  incremented  differences.  In  one  of  the 
most  provocative  bodies  of  work  in  "atmosphering,"  the  Swiss 
architect Philippe Rahm rose  to  prominence simply  by  reintroducing  light,  heat,  and  ventilation  as  objects  of  design.  Rahm's 
work  makes  environmental  contrasts  figurative.  He  speaks  of 
"thermogenesis."20  For  instance,  a  project  for  a  house  creates  a 
gradient  from  very  warm  to  very  cool,  instead  of  uniformity. 
Rahm's works engineer physiological rather than visual response; 
they dramatize embodied cognition. Perhaps best known of these 
is the Hormonorium, or "melatonin room." An installation at the 
2002 Venice Architecture Biennale that simulated the perceptual 
shift you would feel in an alpine snowfield, this room "established 
a  continuity  between  architecture  and  human  metabolism, 
between  space,  light,  and  the  endocrine  and  neurological  systems" by means of anomalies in air and luminance. Nitrogen was 
pumped into the room so that oxygen levels felt like those at high 
altitudes. The floor emitted very bright daylight spectrum illumination from below, like the albedo of snow, as light from below is 
less  naturally  screened  by  the  body  than  light  from  above. 
Response  to  this  intensity  decreased  secretion  of  melatonin,  a 
hormone  that  helps  regulate wakefulness  and sometimes  libido, 
even as the rarefied oxygen increased secretion of endorphins.21

  $   5 &  +   ,   7   ( &  7   8   5 $  /      $   7   0   2   6   3   +   (   5   (   6      |        
Meanwhile, in Atmospheres, perhaps that decade's most-read 
text  on  atmosphere  in  architecture,  Swiss  architect  Peter 
Zumthor described "embodiment, material presence, the sound 
of  a  space,  the  transfer  of  warmth,  incidental  surrounding 
objects,  drifting between  composure and  seduction,  concentration  in  enclosure,  proximity  and  distance,  bringing  light  into 
shadow."22  "Calming,"  the  principle  so  essential  to  Mark 
Weiser's  vision  of  ubiquitous  computing,  also  has  a  place  in 
Zumthor's architecture of material presence. "There are practical 
situations where it is more sensible and far cleverer to introduce 
a  calming  effect,  to  introduce  a  certain  composure  .  .  .  Where 
nothing is trying to coax you away, where you can simply be."23 
Although Zumthor fits many stereotypes of the lone poet, and 
so  gets  labeled  as  one  of  the  romantics  that  modernists  like  to 
dismiss,  his  interpretations remain  influential.  When,  in  2009, 
Zumthor  received  architecture's  highest  honor,  the  Pritzker 
Prize, for many this legitimized atmosphere.

Primal relations connect air with warmth, and thus also with 
fire and pollution. In Fire and Memory, Luis Ferna'ndez-Galiano 
interpreted buildings mainly as channels for energy, contrasting 
an "exosomatic" kind of energy that surrounds for warmth with 
the more usual kinds of energy that power production. In what 
amounts to a thermal theory of intrinsic information for warmth, 
memory  of  surrounding  energy  flows  gives  a  structure  both  to 
construction and perception; the form of space recalls the flows 
of  energy.24  By  abandoning  many  traditional  forms,  modern 
building has caused an amnesia, or at least a dulling of "the eye 
and  the  skin."25  Given  how  much  of  this  amnesia  comes  from 
humanity  having  moved  indoors  for  the  last  century,  it  is  now 
fashionable to say that this loss has been "conditioned by air."26

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
 & R Q G L W L R Q H G  E \  $ L U
Few  technologies  have  been  so  expressive  of  modernity  on  the 
whole, and yet so inexpressive in themselves, as air-conditioning. 
Here is an extreme case of technology so successful that it disappears  into  everyday  life.  Indeed,  many  of  the  places  developed 
since air-conditioning came into everyday use in the mid-twentieth  century  would  be  uncomfortable  or  even  uninhabitable 
without it.27

Air-conditioning  has  been  an  attentional  technology  from 
the start, with the purpose of forgetting the climate and accomplishing  more  work.  Willis  Carrier  foresaw  a  brave  new  world 
where "every day would be a good day."28 Not only the temperature  of  air  but  also  its  humidity  and  purity  were  to  be  conditioned.  There  was  design  appeal  in  the  fact  that  one  airstream 
handled all of these problems.29 But there was appeal as well in 
command and control itself, especially of productivity. Le Corbusier, architecture prophet of the hermetically sealed building, 
foresaw one temperature to fit all, 18oC (64oF).30

Like  many  technologies  on  which  humanity  has  become 
dependent,  air-conditioning  began  as  a  luxury.  Even  into  the 
1960s, most cars still lacked it. Specialized workplaces were the 
early  adopters,  first  in  manufacturing  operations  and  then  in 
offices,  where  the consistency  of  output depended  on environmental conditions. In sultry Washington, the House and Senate 
chambers  got  air-conditioning  in  1928,  the  White  House  in 
1929,  the  new  Supreme  Court  building  in  1932,  and  the 
remainder of  the capitol complex in 1935. Movie theaters and 
department stores first brought air-conditioning into public use 
in the 1920s and 1930s, and they made an attraction of it. The 

  $   5 &  +   ,   7   ( &  7   8   5 $  /      $   7   0   2   6   3   +   (   5   (   6      |        
atmosphere  was  a  goal  in  itself;  on  some  summer  evenings,  it 
became the main reason to go to the movies.

Meanwhile,  architects  experimented  with  the  technology. 
The Philadelphia Savings Fund Society building (1932) was the 
first fully air-conditioned office tower on the East Coast, the first 
to integrate technology in ceilings, and among the first to display 
its huge text logo (PSFS) on the skyline.31

The  systems  integration  of  the  climate-controlled  glass 
tower of the post-World War II era soon fueled fantasies, epitomized  in  the  television  cartoon  sitcom  The  Jetsons  (1962-63), 
and  immortalized  for  architects  in  the  1964  exhibit  Living 
Cities, by the London-based the futurist group Archigram. With 
unlimited actuation and boundless cheap energy, comprehensive 
mechanical  systems  became  not  just  fittings  to  preconceived 
structures but buildings in themselves. Although the age lacked 
embedded computation, these futuristic visions of a fully responsive  architecture  were  nevertheless  computationally  inspired, 
according to the cybernetic agendas (and fantasies) of the time.

To open The Architecture of the Well-tempered Environment 
(1969, and an enduring a classic in this field), architectural technology  historian  Reyner  Banham  apologized  for  architecture's 
neglecting the "whole of the technological art of creating habitable environments." For, "in a world more humanely disposed, 
and more conscious of where the prime human responsibilities 
of architects lie, the chapters that follow would need no apology, 
and  probably  would  never  need  to  be  written."32  That  said, 
Banham  saw  air-conditioning  as  the  key  to  full  architectural 
expression: 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

Firstly, by providing almost total control of the atmospheric 
variables of temperature, humidity, and purity, it has demolished almost all of the environmental constraints on design 
that  have  survived  the  other  great  breakthrough,  electric 
lighting. For anyone who is willing to foot the consequent 
bill for power consumed, it is now possible to live in almost 
any type or form of house one likes to name in any region of 
the world that takes the fancy.33

Charting  the  history  of  steam  heat,  sanitation,  elevators, 
huge buildings, and technology outside the workplace, developments catalyzed by that most truly fundamental agent of modernity,  electrification  (without  which  there  would  be  no 
air-conditioning), Banham found the origins of a machine aesthetic in the early twentieth century. Much as electricity moved 
work away from the furnace, and light and materials to the work 
site,  so  pervasive  computing  is  moving  work  away  from  the 
office  and  desktop,  and  into  the  very  sites  to  which  it  applies. 
Much as electric motors were embedded invisibly into things not 
considered "electric motor applications," such as the refrigerator, 
so  computer  processing  and  memory  are  now  embedded  into 
things  not  considered  computer  applications,  such  as  vehicles. 
And much as electrification gave rise to building environmental 
control  technologies,  so  pervasive  computing  is  giving  rise  to 
adaptable,  socially  networked  versions  of  those  technologies. 
Smart green buildings do more with less. They promise escape 
from dulling atmospheric uniformity.

In Thermal Delight (1979), another classic text from the era 
when architects began to question the sealed glass box, and one 
that  still  captivates  nonarchitects  curious  about  contextual 

  $   5 &  +   ,   7   ( &  7   8   5 $  /      $   7   0   2   6   3   +   (   5   (   6      |        
attention,  Lisa  Heschong  explored  adaptation  to  climate, 
whether through migrations, protective furs, shells, and skins, or 
the building of structures. This is natural. Moreover it is intrinsic.  "When  our  thermal  senses  tell  us  an  object  is  cold,  that 
object is already making us colder. If, on the other hand, I look 
at  a  red  object  it  won't  make  me  redder,  nor  will  touching  a 
bumpy  object  make  me  bumpy."  The  sense  of  touch,  she 
explained, recognizes heat flow and not static temperature: "If I 
touch a piece of metal and a piece of wood that are both at room 
temperature,  the  metal  will  feel  colder  because  it  absorbs  the 
heat from my hand more quickly." There is delight in these differences. By contrast, Heschong likened the "standardized comfort  zone  conditions"  of  climate-controlled  buildings  to  the 
prospect  of  nourishment  by  pills,  injections,  or  "astronaut's 
nutritional goop." For, even though "eating is a basic physiological necessity, no one would overlook the fact that it also plays a 
profound role in the cultural life of a people."34 So does thermal 
delight. Many adaptations to different thermal conditions, such 
as different spaces for different times of year, layers of clothing, 
and,  of  course,  human-operated  layers  of  buildings  themselves 
involve  the  pleasure  of  using  them.  It  feels  good  to  put  on  a 
sweater, to open a window, to move in and out of the shade as 
you walk down a street.

The rise of the ambient invites new integrations of high and 
low tech, and of thermal with other delights, even as the rise of 
energy costs makes uniformity far less affordable anyway. Indeed, 
advances in building technology and in the understanding of air 
currents themselves make the quest for uniformity seem naive scientifically, compared to what designers can now accomplish with 
fluid  mechanics,  boundary  layers,  and  passive  cooling  systems. 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
"Good-bye, Willis Carrier," wrote architectural technology critic 
Michelle  Addington.  "Hello  to  we  know  not  whom."35  But,  in 
this age of smarter materials, surfaces, and buildings, and of ever 
costlier  energy,  that  might  be  hello  to  personal  environmental 
management, shared sensor fields, and ever higher levels of actuation. And good-bye to the project of total technological control, 
disregard  for  timeless  low-tech  solutions,  and  amnesia  for  the 
ambient delights of the unmediated world. Good-bye, in short, to 
what  renegade  novelist  Henry  Miller,  writing  fairly  early  in  the 
history of the one technology that most epitomized his gripe with 
America, called the "Air-Conditioned Nightmare."36

 ) L O O L Q J  W K H  $ L U
Alas,  for  the  moment,  the  nightmare  worsens,  for  there  is  one 
more technology of excess uniformity to consider. No environmental history of information, nor any reconsideration of attention, would be complete without a look at that most ubiquitous, 
unrelenting, inescapable atmospheric scheme of all: background 
music.

What  ubiquitous  information  technology  does  for  atmospheres in architecture is to create a nearly universal impulse to 
fill them. Much as screens have filled almost every empty spot in 
shared built spaces (just try finding a bar without television), so 
the  more  purely  atmospheric  technology  of  background  music 
has  filled  almost  every  empty  volume  (just  try  to  find  a  store, 
shared  workplace,  or  restroom  without  audio).  Miniature  personal players and earpods let you bring music almost anywhere. 
And, to avoid that awkward few seconds of dead air you get on a 
dive  into  a  swimming  pool,  you  can  now  install  underwater 
audio speakers.

  $   5 &  +   ,   7   ( &  7   8   5 $  /      $   7   0   2   6   3   +   (   5   (   6      |        
"I bring earplugs on planes to block out .!.!. the insipid pabulum of the boarding music," Travel & Leisure senior editor Peter 
Jon Lindberg ranted.37 In the ubiquitous use of audio streams as 
branding  devices,  the  chief  offenders are behavioral  marketers--
"puppeteers who don't play music so much as deploy it." Although 
Lindberg's  beat  is  high-end  hotels  and  spas,  where  "new  age" 
music  is  pumped  through  those  underwater  speakers,  the  audio 
perfume goes just about anywhere else. "A friend of mine went in 
for an MRI," Lindberg recounted, "and had to endure not only 
her own claustrophobia but also the clinic's cheesy piped-in sound 
track--45 minutes of continuous soft hits to the head." The programmers' assumption that nobody is listening is exactly false; at 
any given moment, somebody is totally stressing out.38

Muzak(R)  achieved  mainstream  acceptance  about  the  same 
time that air-conditioning did. The name itself is a conflation of 
"music" and "Kodak," presumably to imply push-button ease of 
use. The service began under the name "Wired Radio" in 1922, 
took  on  its  current  brand  name  in  1934,  and  played  a  role  at 
stress reduction for U.S. troops in World War II. It then steadily 
ascended toward its heyday of the 1960s, where in now-legendary  sessions,  professional  ensembles  such  as  Hollyridge  Strings 
committed to vinyl their defamiliarizing orchestral renditions of 
rock  standards  like  "Strawberry  Fields  Forever."39  Muzak(R) 
streamed over leased lines to tens of millions of office workers, 
hotel  guests,  and  yes,  elevator  passengers.  In  one  of  the  more 
savvy  social  histories  of  any  ambient  technology,  Joseph  Lanza 
explained that "background music companies never considered 
elevators their biggest market, however. Their primary customers were places of work and recreation that used music as a mood 
boost, just as radio had orchestrated private homes."40

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

Lanza traced audio behavioralism to Edward Bellamy's 1887 
utopian  science  fiction  novel,  Looking  Backward,  cited  in  a 
Muzak(R) brochure on the company's fiftieth anniversary. Musical 
mood boosting also appeared  in Aldous Huxley's 1932 science 
fiction classic, Brave New World, where "Synthetic Music" made 
with "hyper-violin, super-cello, and oboe-surrogate" contributed 
to the "agreeable languor" of a totalitarian future.41 Lanza found 
the surrealism of Muzak(R) to be its most significant trait. Muzak(R) 
orchestrations  took  compositions  into  hyperrealities  (first  on 
Lanza's  picks  of  twenty  "metarock"  essentials  is  "California 
Dreamin'," as interpreted by Hugo Winterhalter).42 Also surreal 
was Muzak(R)'s delivery from disembodied sources: filtering out of 
ceilings and walls, back when that was still considered odd. But, 
above all, Lanza found  mood music surrealistic with attention: 
"For  a  more clinical  definition: mood music  shifts  music from 
figure  to  ground,  to  encourage  peripheral  hearing.  Psychoanalysts might say that it displaces attention from music's manifest 
content to its more surreal latent content."43

Of course, not everyone thinks that silence brings only discomfort  and  boredom,  even  when  waiting.  Critics  of  mood 
music, some of them vociferous rockers even, do value sustained 
silence from time to time. Indeed, you might ask whether someone who needs to fill every moment with music, movies, or messaging isn't somehow existentially challenged.

Critically acclaimed ambient music does exist. Some ambient pieces, such as those written or inspired by Karlheinz Stockhausen, come from the traditional disciplines of Western music. 
Others  seem  more  countercultural,  such  as  the  sounds  that 
stream  over  "Drone  Zone"  Internet  radio.44  For  with  the 
advanced sequencing capacity and timbre inventions of the latest 

  $   5 &  +   ,   7   ( &  7   8   5 $  /      $   7   0   2   6   3   +   (   5   (   6      |        
software, music needn't have a tune as such to be legitimate. Yet 
much  as  people  have  been  conditioned  by  air  to  have  a  much 
narrower  thermal  comfort  range,  so  they  may  also  have  been 
conditioned  by  background  music  to  have  a  much  narrower 
audio  comfort  range,  a  range  whose  very  narrowness  and  predictability  are  comforts  in  themselves.  Lindberg  could  confidently  predict  hearing  Sade  croon  "Smooth  Operator"  once 
again in a frequent flier lounge.45 Anything more experimental 
would be obtrusive. Probing "elevator noir," Lanza observed that 
even  Brian  Eno's  inexhaustible  standard,  Ambient  1:  Music  for 
Airports (1977), wouldn't play in Pittsburgh. Indeed, when they 
actually played Music for Airports in the airport there, throughout the concourses for ten hours a day, across the nine days of 
the  1982 Three  Rivers  Arts  Festival,  "many patrons  reportedly 
complained to airport personnel about this uneasy listening and 
asked that the regular background music be restored."46

In early 2009, the Muzak(R) corporation filed for Chapter 11 
bankruptcy.  At  the  moment  the  industry  leader  appears  to  be 
DMX(R), whose streams may reach as many as 100 million listeners, with or without a chance to click "Accept." Playlist matching to lifestyle category has come a long way since elevator music. 
The sensory effect has become a carefully formulated component 
of  induced  consumption.  Thus,  from  the  "About  Us"  page  at 
dmx.com:

DMX--where  great  brands  make  sense.  In  a  world  where 
the average person sees 3,000 advertisements a day, the only 
way to stand out is by delivering a multi-sensory experience 
customers  won't  forget.  An  international  leader  in  multisensory  branding,  DMX  has  been  creating  unforgettable 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

brand experiences for commercial environments since 1971. 
The first music service to license and program original artist 
music, DMX has rigorously researched and tested the effects 
of  music,  video,  messaging  and  scent  on  human  behavior. 
By integrating them into a single compelling experience, we 
help clients drive repeat business and build brand loyalty.

If you have a problem with this, you can always just bring your 
own headphones. So far, nobody has engineered noise cancellation on any larger scale.

 5 H H Q J L Q H H U L Q J  I R U  $ L U
Consider  a  move  away  from  conditioning  and  filling  the  air, 
toward appreciating air for itself, and including atmosphere in a 
better  balance  of  attention.  Just  what  extent  of  technology  do 
you want? For being here now, there is nothing quite like taking 
a  moment  to  open  or  close  a  window  yourself.  And  for  the 
better building performance necessary to an age of costly energy, 
new kinds of monitoring,  feedback, load balancing, and  smallscale  tuning  now  arise.  Smart  green  building  could  be  either 
much  more  automatic  or  much  more  participatory,  however. 
Much as twentieth-century uniformity proved neither affordable 
nor  physiologically  healthy,  so  twenty-first-century  responsiveness  has  its  limits  as  well:  total  adaptability  might  be  neither 
affordable nor psychologically healthy. Architecture's fixity, reliability, and persistence count for plenty, especially in the workings of attention.

Augmentation  by  embedded  computation  makes  buildings 
far more adaptable, and this pays. Although theaters, restaurants, 
and  other  such  sites  of  social  gathering  already  engineer  their 
atmospheres  quite  carefully,  as  does  the  home,  it  is  in  the 

  $   5 &  +   ,   7   ( &  7   8   5 $  /      $   7   0   2   6   3   +   (   5   (   6      |        
workplace that new building technologies count for most. Energy 
conservation and greater worker efficiency have made investment 
in better workplace technologies far more financially feasible than 
it was in the heyday of the sealed glass box. The workplace tends 
to be the most wasteful of energy, where people most often put 
up with technologies they detest, need to dress in extra layers to 
counter  the  air-conditioning,  wear  headphones  to  escape  the 
background music, or step outside to get a breath of fresh air.

Increasingly,  the  use  of  sensors,  actuators,  and  networks  in 
buildings  makes  their  atmospheric  control  less  rigid,  and  their 
conditioned  air  more  breathable.  Today's  building  skins  have 
come a long way beyond the glass curtain wall. With better feedback  and  kinematics,  operable  windows  are  a  possibility  again. 
Alas, this requires adaptations. Much as people protest when made 
to park more than a block from their destinations, likewise enough 
have  been  so  conditioned  by  air  that  any  inconvenience  meets 
with protest. Thus, even though public health studies clearly indicate the benefits of taking the stairs when going just one flight up 
or down, implementing skip-stop elevators to encourage this practice is usually met with outcries of indignation.

Such outcries greeted the recently constructed Federal Building in San Francisco, the first U.S. high-rise in decades to be built 
without  central  air-conditioning.  This  building's  "living  skin" 
monitors atmospheric conditions, creates passive chimney effects, 
and triggers active vent motors.47 Evidently, the building's freedom  to  change  conditions  was  not  matched  with  the  workers' 
freedom to change their work location or orientation with them. 
And even though millions of dollars were saved in construction 
and  energy  costs,  now  someone's  papers  are  getting  blown 
around.48 It doesn't help that signature architects have gone for 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
decades  without  bringing  atmospheric  performance  into  their 
designs.  But  priorities  have  changed  very  quickly  of  late,  and 
sometimes signature  designers (Morphosis, in  this case) are just 
the ones able to push owners and builders to try something different.  Novelty  is  now  less  about  achieving  attention-seeking 
sculptural  form  and  more  about  achieving  attention-restoring 
atmospheres. 

Still,  the  technology  does  advance.  Other  projects  have 
achieved  passive  airflow  systems  in  far  less  forgiving  climates 
than San Francisco's, often through the use of double skins and 
sensate  elements. Thus the Manitoba  Hydro Tower  in Winnipeg  (figure  8.3)  runs  mainly  on  a  vertical  stack  effect  and 
employs geothermal heating and cooling. For the few weeks each 
year when  the northern  prairie climate  is  actually pleasant,  the 
tower has windows that open.

To  futurists,  the  building  skin  becomes  the  main  locus  of 
twenty-first-century advances in construction, as designers pursue 
the long-running fantasy of a fully cybernetic architecture, something  well  beyond  the  visions  of  Archigram  and  the  Jetsons. 
Thus,  in  biomimetic  buildings,  tensile  structures  morph  incrementally  at  the  joints  of  tiled  surface  membranes  with  shape 
memory alloys as actuators, using a time-averaged compilation of 
proximate motion data as input. Like a flower opening, the surface  of  such  structures  changes  form  quickly  enough  that  it 
appears perceptibly different each time you glance away and back 
at it, but slowly enough slowly to appear static under your constant gaze. This makes it atmospheric. Whether there is any practical advantage in such kinetics seems open to debate. That said, a 
fully responsive enclosure seems inherently practical to its enthusiasts.  Walls  move  about  to  resize  spaces  to  the  needs  of  the 

  $   5 &  +   ,   7   ( &  7   8   5 $  /      $   7   0   2   6   3   +   (   5   (   6      |        
moment. Openings expand and contract with the weather. Building envelopes filter and breathe on demand. Data murals suggest 
the  general  co-presence  of  colleagues  or  display  particular  longterm derivatives of organizational performance. Fixtures interoperate, and remote-controlled devices from sunscreens to security 
doors  to  the  coffeemaker  serve  as  "proprioceptors,"  in  the 

       Biodynamic double facade: Manitoba Hydro Place, Winnipeg, 2008 (architects: KPMB). Photo: Tom Arban.

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
parlance of cybernetics. Although some architectural components 
of these fantasies are in fact real, the category error is to imagine 
that all are so. To expect the ultimate role of an information layer 
to  be  reconfiguring  form  itself  belies  architects'  emphasis  on 
form.  How  stasis  could  be  newly  appreciated,  and  made  more 
usable, in an age of electronic flux gets less speculation.

The  stillness  of  buildings  does  have  advantages,  especially 
with  regard  to  attention.  Embodied  attention  depends  on  the 
fixity and persistence of enough phenomena to provide cognitive 
building blocks for more expert cognition in action. From what 
is now known about activity theory and attention, a totally fluid 
and endlessly reconfigurable environment would be counterproductive. Inhabitation needs fixity, like a river needs banks. Total 
stasis may be dulling, but complete flux would be stupefying.

Cameras,  motion  sensors,  noise  level  monitors,  air  quality 
measurements,  and  a  variety  of  other  instruments  today  make 
almost any new building a smart building. Embedded processing 
and memory bring averages, ranges, and patterns, or sometimes 
even complex adaptive learning, into the process of environmental management. A neural metaphor applies. Microsoft, for one, 
has  long  referred  to  "digital  nervous  systems."  Unfortunately, 
passively living within sensate environments too often produces 
as much psychological unease as physiological comfort. Security 
systems,  the  most  ubiquitous,  visual,  and  passive  of  sensate 
building layers, likewise breed distrust at some higher level, even 
as  they  ensure  basic  personal  safety.  Furthermore,  like  background music, most of the layers give you no chance to opt out 
or  even  to  tweak  the  resulting  conditions.  Your  mere  presence 
may imply consent. As in music, so in warmth, lighting levels, 
airflow,  and  just  about  any  atmospheric  condition,  nothing  is 

  $   5 &  +   ,   7   ( &  7   8   5 $  /      $   7   0   2   6   3   +   (   5   (   6      |        
going to please everyone. Furthermore, despite the unquestionable benefits of today's more sensitive feedback control systems, 
no managed environmental condition is going to be fully stable, 
predictable,  or  uniform.  Because  building  engineers  know  that 
occupants  compensate  too  much,  too  late,  a  local  aberration 
such as a drafty spot may not be subject to "end user control." 
Occupants, for their part, feel frustrated when denied participation despite frequent use. You might say that, as more buildings 
get nervous systems, more occupants get nervous.

Cooperation  can  both  reduce  these  anxieties  and  improve 
physical  conditions. This  begins with  the building  becoming a 
social software  interface in itself. According to Norbert Streitz, 
who coined the expression "cooperative building" in the 1990s, 
"with  the  disappearing  computer,  the  `world  around  us'  is  the 
interface  to  information  and  for  the  cooperation  of  people.  In 
this approach, the computer as a device disappears and is almost 
`invisible.'"49 In other words, social sharing has been important 
to  the  ambient  information  agenda  since  long  before  Twitter. 
An  appropriately  embodied  interface  provides  awareness  not 
only of co-presence and gatherings, but also of building performance  itself.  This  gives  occupants  a  stake  in  seeking  environmental quality, and sometimes also in managing it. In a recent 
survey  of  some  6,000  office  workers  across  sixteen  U.S.  cities, 
IBM found nearly a two-to-one majority "willing to help redesign their workplace to make it more environmentally responsible," although only about a quarter said their buildings "adjust 
environment automatically based on occupancy."50

Despite  rapid  advances  in  smart  green  building,  few  projects 
demonstrate  personalized  or  social  interfaces  to  comfort  management. Again, few engineers find that desirable. Pervasive computing 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
does change this problem, however. Wireless sensor technologies 
and embedded memory systems do give higher resolution, finer 
sensitivity, and greater stability to building technology feedback 
control  systems.  Participatory  monitoring  appears  on  handheld 
apps and at office kiosks (figure 8.4). These systemic properties 
allow  greater  local  variation,  and  greater  participation  in  control.51  Thus  where  the  chaotic  inconsistency  of  so  many  user 
inputs  would  have  unbalanced  an  environmental  system  in  the 
past, and been considered counterproductive to goals of efficient 
uniformity, today it might not. Consider the rise of human computer  interface  design.  Back  when  computers  were  expensive, 
software  was  designed  to  conserve  machine  cycles,  and  to  consume those in the name of usability was considered wrong. Today 
when  machine  cycles  are  nearly  free,  attention  has  become  the 
scarcest resource, and both usability and aesthetics have become 
foremost software design considerations.

      Persuasive design in building performance gauges: Building Dashboard(R) Kiosk, Lucid Design Studios, 2011.

  $   5 &  +   ,   7   ( &  7   8   5 $  /      $   7   0   2   6   3   +   (   5   (   6      |        

The  technology  now  exists  to  let  you  override  automated 
systems, identify the right controls to tweak to anticipate recurring  conditions,  and  not  just  to  overcompensate  after  the  fact. 
Architecture  technology  researcher  Raymond  Cole  has  emphasized  the  need  to  reconcile  human  and  technological  inputs  in 
smart  buildings.  Cole  compares  technological,  organizational, 
and human intelligence and asserts that, for better or worse, all 
buildings  teach  or  neglect  some  kind  of  social  pattern  of  environmental responsibility. Thus, "increasingly, research confirms 
the  importance  of  having  some  level  of  direct  control  over  the 
environmental conditions in the workplace as being paramount 
to  occupant  satisfaction."52  Yet  it  is  important  not  to  conflate 
comfort, convenience, and calming (figure 8.5). All must figure 
in what soft cities pioneer Dan Hill has called "the personal welltempered environment."53

      Comfort, convenience, and calming.
        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

For  the  technology  of  atmosphere,  and  with  respect  to 
attention, the idea of cooperative buildings raises two important 
questions. Does the psychological comfort of having a stake in 
environmental management offset the  physiological discomfort 
that may result from a tendency to overcompensate or from how 
no atmospheric state pleases everyone? And does participation in 
environment  provide  some  grounding  or  calming,  and  thus  a 
balance in kinds of attention, or does it become just one more 
annoyance adding to a sense of overload?

        $ 5 & + , 7 ( & 7 8 5 $ /  $ 7 0 2 6 3 + ( 5 ( 6
   0 D L Q  L G H D     $ P E L H Q W  L V  Q R W  X Q L I R U P   D W P R V S K H U H  L V  G H V L J Q  V X E M H F W  
     P D W W H U 

   & R X Q W H U D U J X P H Q W     $ L U  V K R X O G  J R  X Q Q R W L F H G
   . H \  W H U P V     $ W P R V S K H U H   F R Q G L W L R Q H G  E \  D L U
   : K D W  K D V  F K D Q J H G       6 P D U W H U   J U H H Q H U  E X L O G L Q J
   & D W D O \ V W     ( Q Y L U R Q P H Q W D O  D Z D U H Q H V V
   5 H O D W H G  I L H O G     $ U F K L W H F W X U H
   2 S H Q  G H E D W H     ' R  L Q K D E L W D Q W V  Z D Q W  W R  S D U W L F L S D W H "

 

 
 0 H J D F L W \  5 H V R X U F H V

Urban  computing  now  comes  of  age.  Beyond  the  responsive 
room,  the  outdoor  screen,  or  the  location  tag,  information 
media permeate the built environment and form urban resource 
networks.  At  this  scale,  it  becomes  harder  to  study  attention 
itself, yet easier to understand inhabitation and usability as one.1

As  mobile  technology  remakes  attention  at  street  level,  it 
meets the embedded. Everyday transactions use and create long 
trails  of  data.  New  layers  remake  experiences  of  transit,  shopping, basic utility connections, and, in some cases, even the allocation of housing. Although the usual image of smart cities has 
been  wealthy  and  utopian,  the  more  profound  significance  of 
their new information layers may lie in new living patterns across 
the  multicentered  urban  archipelagoes  sometimes  known  as 
"megacities."2  Active  participation  in  emergent  networks  helps 
make local habits and routines comprehensible. Wherever people 
improvise  organizations  to  get  on  with  life  amid  the  chaos  of 
new  settlement  patterns,  ambient  information  plays  a  part. 

        |        $ 0  %   ,   (   1   7      &   2 0  0  2   1   6
Many of these provisional arrangements provide access to infrastructure, identity to community, or opportunity for local business.  Unlike  global  finance,  which  tends  to  operate  in 
disembodied  and  disengaged  ways,  these  ad  hoc  arrangements 
operate on the ground, in small transactions that can seldom be 
predictably  formulated--maintaining,  and  sometimes  even 
increasing,  the  kinds  of  human,  social,  or  natural  capital  that 
remote  corporations  may  not  even  recognize.  As  such,  they 
demand new approaches of design, research, and interface arts. 
They also need a new name.

 7 K H  5 L V H  R I  8 U E D Q  , Q I R U P D W L F V
Just thirty years ago, "smart city" meant "fashionable dress."3 Just 
ten years ago, "smart grid" had yet to appear in the mainstream 
news  media.4  And,  less  than  a  decade  ago,  the  field  of  urban 
informatics first emerged. In 2006, the U.S. technology research 
journal IEEE Pervasive Computing organized a conference theme 
on urban  computing,  a term  introduced  by  Eric Paulos,  then  at 
Intel Research.5 The following year, a workshop on "urban informatics"  was  held  in  Australia,  and  a  research  handbook  by 
Marcus  Foth  published.6  The  coinage  "urban  informatics"  is 
often credited to the pioneering virtual communitarian Howard 
Rheingold, who foresaw the significance of street-level experience 
to  digital  culture.7  Rheingold  was  responding  to  the New  York 
City Wireless Initiative and to the writings of William J. Mitchell,  whose  urban  technology  trilogy  told  of  "teleserviced  neighborhoods" and "computers for living in."8

For architects, "smart city" means a departure from the algorithmically  fabricated  forms  that  have  preoccupied  most  digital 
designers; for engineers, it represents a departure from all-powerful 

  0   (   * $  &  ,   7   <      5   (   6   2 8   5   & (   6      |        
handheld gadgets. In a 2006 interview with Metropolis magazine, 
Mitchell  explained  how  the  smart  city  is  not  all  mobile;  it  also 
runs  on  new combinations  with  embedded  intelligence:  "A  particularly powerful design strategy under these conditions is to look 
for the  ways  that  embedded  intelligence  loosens traditional relationships and constraints, and seize these as opportunities for fundamentally reimagining a product or system's organization, shape, 
and  scale."9  Thus  the  oft-cited  MIT  project  for  a  new  CityCar 
applied the battery capacity from racks of parked cars to citywide 
power storage balancing. Even everyday Zipcars demonstrate the 
network  principle  of  product-service  systems,  nontragic  commons,  and  productive  combinations  of  mobile  and  embedded 
technologies.

"The real-time city is now real!" declared MIT's SENSEable 
City Laboratory in 2011. "The way we describe and understand 
cities is being radically transformed--alongside the tools we use 
to design them and impact on their physical structure."10 Among 
the  lab's  many  well-known  projects,  the  Copenhagen  Wheel 
(2009) combined energy harvesting, route selection, and ambient environmental data for bicyclists. After an interview with lab 
director  Carlo  Ratti,  blogger  Dan  Hill  described  a  "new  soft 
city," where "you can see real-time information along one slice, 
one  axis,  and  this  enables  us  to  anticipate  a  future  city  where 
perhaps the majority of the urban activity will generate impossible swathes of real-time data."11 In his 2010 book, Smart Things, 
Mike  Kuniavsky  connected  this  phenomenon  of  "information 
shadows" with a more fundamental notion of "information as a 
material."  Both  are  evident  in  street-level  resources  such  as 
Zipcar, or its bicycle  counterpart, Velib. "Information processing no longer needs to be the purpose of an object, but is one of 

        |        $ 0  %   ,   (   1   7      &   2 0  0  2   1   6
many qualities that enables it to be useful and desirable in ways 
that  are  more  directly  related  to  people's  wants  and  needs.  In 
other words, information processing no longer defines the identity of an object, but is one of many materials from objects can 
be made."12 To the visionaries of urban informatics mentioned 
here, these new materials and shadows become as intrinsic a part 
of  embodied  urban  experience  as  tags,  city  lights,  and  media 
facades.

Over  the  last  decade,  hundreds  of  aspiring  labs  have  produced thousands of street-level applications for arts festivals like 
ZeroOne  and  Ars  Electronica.  Research  conferences  such  as 
those  sponsored  by  IEEE  Pervasive  Computing  increasingly 
accept smart city design project presentations. Burgeoning business conferences such as Where 2.0 test the entrepreneurial prospects  of  street-level  location-based  media.  Interlink  research 
policy initiatives from the  European  Union focus on "ambient 
computing and communications environments."13 Big technology corporations have entered the field as well. IBM, for example, now promotes "A Smarter Planet." In a white paper entitled 
"Smarter Cities for Smarter Growth," IBM asserted the importance of better information services to overall urban prosperity. 
The  experience  of  using  urban  infrastructures  has  become  an 
ever more crucial component of livability, as measured by, say, 
the Human Development Index. Seen from the top, where IBM 
provides consultation to policy makers and infrastructure builders,  the  challenge  is  to  integrate.  The  city  is  a  "system  of  systems,"  which  integrates  core  services  in  transportation,  health 
care, public safety, and public education. But even from the top, 
this  challenge  increasingly  emphasizes  bottom-up  social  phenomena.  The  way  to  integrate,  the  white  paper  asserts,  is  to 

  0   (   * $  &  ,   7   <      5   (   6   2 8   5   & (   6      |        
leverage the vast amount of existing data that accumulates in the 
course of everyday behaviors, and to make it "widely accessible 
to citizens."14

"Smart  Grid  will  be  bigger  than  the  Internet,"15  Cisco's 
CEO John Chambers proclaimed in 2010 as his company joined 
the race to build new energy infrastructure. Pervasive computing 
pioneers have often pointed out that, like electrical power in the 
twentieth century, digital processing in the twenty-first has disappeared  into  everyday  life.  Arguably  the  core  technology  of 
modernity,  electricity  introduced  such  concepts  as  appliances, 
pay as you go, and the grid itself into popular consciousness.

Alas,  the  electrical  grid  suffers  from  excessively  top-down 
control,  with  huge  power  plants  and  distribution  networks 
administered  as  public  utilities;  and  it  has  been  astonishingly 
wasteful, not just in how it transmits power but also in how its 
end users apply that power. By many estimates, a third to a half 
of the electricity used in buildings in the United States is wasted, 
and, by most estimates, buildings surpass vehicles as producing 
the  largest  fraction  of  the  nation's  avoidable  carbon  emissions. 
Thus electricity now seems ripe for, as Internet strategists would 
put it, "distributed social production." Today's investors bet on 
smart grids; consumers become cogenerators; devices time their 
operations to help balance demand loads; lights turn themselves 
off when you leave the room; and organizations actively monitor 
and reconfigure their consumption patterns. And, as with electricity, so with many other aspects of everyday life.

A more bottom-up approach to smart cities presents a new 
kind of design challenge. Just as electrification in the early twentieth century gave rise to a new discipline of industrial design, so 
smart, distributed, interoperable, data-intensive, citizen-accessible 

        |        $ 0  %   ,   (   1   7      &   2 0  0  2   1   6
urban  infrastructure  in  the  early  twenty-first  is  giving  rise  to  a 
new  discipline  of  pervasive  interaction  design.  "Street  computing" provides another possible name for this shift. As explained 
by  Marcus  Foth,  who  has  organized  events  and  publications 
under  this  name,  street  computing  at  its  core  facilitates  better 
bottom-up awareness of the city, making more systems queriable 
and programmable.16 As with electrification, this enables unforeseen appropriations and engenders new kinds of participation.17 
In the words of Eric Paulos: "We need to expand our perceptions 
of our mobile phones as simply a communication tool and celebrate  them  in  their  new  role  as  personal  measurement  instruments  capable  of  sensing  our  natural  environment  and 
empowering collective action through everyday grassroots citizen 
science across blocks, neighborhoods, cities, and nations."18

This participatory information stewardship transforms perceptions, both individual and social, of the city itself. Then, as 
urban usability constructs agreements to participate, to monitor, 
and to seek stewardship, it begins to take on aspects of a situated 
information commons.

 $  1 H Z  0 H Q W D O  0 D S
With urban computing, "psychogeography" has entered a different  era.  Relations  between  embodied  cognition,  spatial  mental 
maps,  and  explicit  wayshowing  systems  now  slip  apart  and 
recombine. From the perspective of architecture and urbanism, 
street-level media increase the importance of having worthwhile 
places to go. From the perspective of habitual attention, "worthwhile"  means  something  more  than  momentarily  amusing.  In 
the rise of urban informatics, active participation supplants passive amusement (figure 9.1).

  0   (   * $  &  ,   7   <      5   (   6   2 8   5   & (   6      |        
"Psychogeography" was coined by the mid-twentieth-century 
situationists, whom today's proponents of situated technology still 
read.  Reacting  to  the  politics  of  the  broadcast  monoculture, 
under  which  they  saw  the  terms  of  viewing  increasingly  being 
furnished, the situationists proposed that the best way to step out 
of  that  monoculture  was  to  engage  physical  space  in  unanticipated  terms,  The  best  way  to  do  so  was  to  walk  a  playful  drift 
(de'rive) among less-noticed things, to bring some of those things 
into  telling  juxtapositions  (de'tournement)  that  would  break  the 

      The basic idea of urban informatics.

        |        $ 0  %   ,   (   1   7      &   2 0  0  2   1   6
spell  of  the  politically  engineered  distractions  (spectacles).  To  a 
situationist, play does not mean games with fixed rules so much 
as crossing in and out of states of expectation. This works better 
through serendipitous choice of which circumstances to ignore and 
which  to  exaggerate  than  by  retreating  into  declared  sets  of  personal preferences.19 To the best-known situationist, Guy Debord, 
who  is  most  often  credited  with  these  terms,  psychogeography 
cultivated  a  self-awareness  of  attention  to  surroundings.  By 
means of playful departures from expected behavior, whether for 
personal  or  social  reasons,  the  mindful  citizen  could  repurpose 
situations, and so reveal how those engineered distraction.20 This 
mindfulness had ambient character; Debord referred to it as "the 
ambiance of play."21

Today's technologies differ substantially from the broadcast 
media of the situationists' era, of course. The monoculture that 
the situationists protested has dissipated. As noted in the chapter 
on screens, media have proliferated to the point where planned 
spectacles  go  unnoticed.  The  capacity  to  create  spatial  mental 
models  hasn't  really  changed,  however.  The  body  imposes  a 
schema  on  space,  and  the  arrangement  of  bodies  in  space 
expresses  those  schemas  in  society.  Tacit  knowledge  of  these 
configurations informs spatial mental models, whether of communities  of  practice,  contested  ground,  or  anonymous  drift 
along avenues.

Also, as noted in the chapter on embodiment, elements of 
mental models become internalized and externalized by activity. 
According to first principles of anthropology, the experience of 
urban  activity  emphasizes  interpersonal  distance,  spatial  distributions of hierarchical orders, and sites of collective commemoration.22 Landmarks, districts, edges tacit and explicit, and nodes 

  0   (   * $  &  ,   7   <      5   (   6   2 8   5   & (   6      |        
among one or more infrastructures provide the building blocks 
of spatial mental  models. These models  often take the form of 
ever-adapting collages of such elements, and seldom occur just as 
tags on a two-dimensional projection like a Google map, or any 
single uniform Cartesian  view. The  most famous  visualizations 
of these models might be the "cognitive maps" created by architects and planners in the 1960s and 1970s, the most original of 
which  was  the  oft-cited  "Image  of  the  City"  by  urban  planner 
Kevin Lynch.

Urban  exploration  applications  in  mobile  and  embedded 
computing should thus be of considerable interest to cognition 
researchers. Where does the augmented city amplify the advantages of embodiment, and where does it cancel them out? When 
mediation such as GPS increasingly assists externalization, what 
happens to internalization? How do social navigation and more 
overt declaration of interests and preferences reshape street-level 
serendipity?  If,  after  a  decade  of  street-level  urban  informatics, 
everyone  were  to  put  their  technology  away,  would  their  city 
skills be higher or lower than they had been before the technology? Or does the infusion of space with so many media simply 
erase all spatial mental models? Does the covering of high-resolution  intrinsic  information  with  lower-resolution  processed 
information reduce affordances or affinities for embodied cognition overall, and thus reduce the image of the city as well?

You might expect that personal choices about maintaining a 
sensibility to surroundings figure in this. The influence of technology  on  urban  experience  might  depend  on  your  attitude 
toward  environment,  information  as  a  material,  or  perceptions 
of  overload.  All  of  which  makes  universalist  media  and  their 
sociologies suspect.

        |        $ 0  %   ,   (   1   7      &   2 0  0  2   1   6

You might also read the paradigm shift from virtual worldbuilding to urban informatics as an optimistic indicator of continuing spatial affinities. The exercise of embodied cognition can 
be restorative. It can feel more natural than purely abstract symbol-processing  skills.  Urban  informatics  can  tap  latent  spatial 
abilities.  To  Carlo  Ratti,  this  makes  it  "more  Spacebook  than 
Facebook."23

In the principles of embodied cognition, participation itself 
is situated. Street computing doesn't simply add a layer of portals to someplace else, but instead adds to cognition of the present  place.  It  doesn't  command  attention  on  one  channel  at  a 
time,  but  instead  interleaves  media  objects  among  themselves 
and  with  unmediated  objects,  and  in  effect  becomes  ambient. 
Sites, props, social contexts, and interpersonal protocols of conduct produce a sense of engagement, which surpasses solitary use 
of a handheld device on a universal network at providing a sense 
of belonging, learning, or craft. According to philosophers from 
many different ages, those habits of skilled, purposeful engagement make better citizens.24

The casual, provisional arrangements of everyday life in the 
megacity remain elusive, however. Although the major builders 
of mobile and embedded technology have doubtless undertaken 
private studies of these arrangements, published studies such as 
the biennial working papers of Sri Lanka-based LIRNEasia on 
mobile  technology  practices  at  the  bottom  of  the  pyramid  are 
few and far between.25 A comprehensive street-level ethnography 
of  media  practices  in  the  new  megacities  has  yet  to  emerge. 
Because  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  overarching  unity  in  the 
currently sparse literature, for now, simply consider a few contrasting cases, particularly from the perspective of attention.

  0   (   * $  &  ,   7   <      5   (   6   2 8   5   & (   6      |        
 : D \ V K R Z L Q J
When  you  combine  a  smartphone  used  as  cursor  with  a  positioning system such as GPS to look up nearby features, you get a 
"reality browser." To browse is to discover possibilities along the 
way; to browse reality is to combine the use of labels and links 
with  presence  in  the  physical  spaces  they  describe.  That  can't 
happen in virtual spaces because a sense of presence depends on 
embodiment  in  haptic  orientation  and  the  inner  ear.  Now 
street-level  media  are  available  to  help in  the  exercise  of  those. 
For someone who grew up being driven everywhere, street-level 
media may provide a necessary externalization, to be followed by 
internalization, of some basic city skills. This advances the centuries-old agenda of inscribing the city for incidental visitors.

Socially  acceptable  augmentations  do  exist.  First  off,  most 
digital navigation is not to commercial offerings, but to friends. 
Social navigation now adds checking in to its moves. To declare 
your location on a social reality browser such as Foursquare lets 
unplanned  encounters  occur.  To  share  tags  and  applications 
generates  social  life  around  particular  activities  and  de'rives, 
whether the active gaming of Parkour, the field identifications of 
plants  or  birds  by  naturalists,  or  the  eccentric  quests  of  collectors. Because a better wayshowing app makes systems of tags and 
labels available only to those who are interested, it helps urban 
explorers with filtering. The more that tags work as digital augmentations,  the  less  they  clutter  physical  spaces.  On  the  other 
hand, such filtering serves to fragment the social sphere and creates new forms of digital divides.

Most  people  regard  unfiltered,  passive  augmentations  as 
little  more  than  surveillance,  which  helps  explain  the  generally 
negative view of pervasive computing. However, concern about 

        |        $ 0  %   ,   (   1   7      &   2 0  0  2   1   6
an  Orwellian  Big  Brother  may  overlook  a  more  real  concern 
about just how many thousands of little brothers are skimming 
personal  data.  Consumer  analytics  have  moved  beyond  your 
desktop  click  stream  to  your  physical  movements  in  the  built 
environment. Retail planning was already a science of positioning;  and  now  advertising,  the  discipline  most  adept  at  media 
placement,  may  use  proximity  and  spatial  movement  pattern 
recognition  to  deliver  messages  into  contexts  where  they  are 
more  likely  to  be  noticed.  Tracking  may  also  employ  sensors, 
even  face-interpreting  software,  embedded  into  aisles  and 
shelves.  Thus  the  Quividi  audience  measurement  service  uses 
visual analytics to document how long you look at a particular 
display.26 Target audio beam technologies allow a spoken message  to  be  delivered  to  a  precise  location  when  triggered  by  a 
motion  sensor.27  Abuses of  attention  rights  may have  only just 
begun. In other words, the prevailing early trends of urban informatics as wayshowing do not bode well for a tangible information commons.

 1 H Z  ( S L J U D S K \
Researchers and critics alike advance an urban informatics based 
on participation. As explored in the chapter on tagging, a new 
middle ground emerges between official inscriptions and transgressive  graffiti,  which  could  be  called  the  "new  epigraphy." 
New  forms  of  annotation  invite  membership  organizations, 
curation, and study.

Previous forms of signage have increased the usability of the 
city for the casual or unfamiliar visitor. But, for the resident, they 
are presumably unnecessary, and possibly an annoyance. The resident  takes  pride  in  awareness  of  changes  to  neighborhood 

  0   (   * $  &  ,   7   <      5   (   6   2 8   5   & (   6      |        
amenities  and  the  everyday  routes  they  establish.  The  resident 
makes  more  use  of  intrinsic  information  and  takes  many  more 
objects and events as signs. These are often of neighbors, of the 
encroachment of unwanted developers (who tend to trample on 
unquantified  forms  of  local  value),  or  of  the  need  for  civic  services.  Thus  the  highly  successful  maintenance  wish  list  site 
SeeClickFix,  which  uses  "citizen"  prominently  in  its  mission 
statement,  rallies  residents:  that  one  resident  expresses  concern 
about an amenity lets another care, too. Other hyperlocal aggregators work across a variety of interests; outside.in, a pioneering 
hyperlocal  news  service,  aggregates  bloggers  by  location,  and 
establishes a mood of curating local lore.28

Sound  mapping  works  as  urban  storytelling,  too.  Tactical 
Sound  Garden  (TSG),  another  oft-cited  project,  demonstrated 
this  process  for  the  favored  hotspot  of  Bryant  Park,  the  birthplace of wireless Internet civics in New York City. Using threedimensional positional technology, participants install a zone of 
audio overlays  for browsing by anyone with headphones and  a 
Wi-Fi  device.  Many  such  sound  gardens  develop  on  particular 
themes,  such  as  local  history,  tagger  culture,  signspotting,  or 
remembrance. TSG is currently an open-source toolkit for planning and  "pruning" (modifying playback  parameters) of sound 
gardens anywhere with good Wi-Fi coverage. A similar process 
works for images, incidentally. One famous Layar app lets you 
see images of the Berlin Wall in the context where it once stood, 
as shown in figure 9.2.

Much as networking has long allowed amateurs to become 
aggregators and producers of music and images, so now it allows 
them  to gather  environmental data.  Thus, Living  Light (figure 
9.3) let participants text data to and from a park pavilion display 

        |        $ 0  %   ,   (   1   7      &   2 0  0  2   1   6
of accumulated energy usage data, which compared the present 
year  to  the  previous  one  across  the  Seoul  region.  Projects  like 
this raise a very good question: how do cultural curators of participatory urban annotation systems see their work in relation to 
traditional or physical aspects of a commons?

In  the  recent  compilation  From  Social  Butterfly  to  Engaged 
Citizen,  which  includes  cases  on  food,  traffic,  gardens,  radio, 
crowds, and membership organizations, several leading scholars 
have offered positions on the ethics of urban social computing.29 
Many  of  the  participatory  qualities  of  Web  2.0  become  more 
significant when coupled with the activities of daily life. For, just 
as the attention costs of passive media and autonomous annoyances are greater when you can't click away from them, so the 

      Reality browser: "Berlin Wall 3D" for Layar, Hoppala Agency, 2010. Photo: Marc Rene' Gardeya, Hoppala.

  0   (   * $  &  ,   7   <      5   (   6   2 8   5   & (   6      |        
      Open-source ecofeedback: Living Light, Seoul, The Living, 2008. Photo: Soo-in Yang.
benefits  of  active  media  and  social  networks  feel  greater  when 
you apply them to shared physical environments. 

Active  participation  in  situated  technology  has  most  often 
taken the form of do-it-yourself (DIY) environmental monitoring. Participants sample, upload, map, and share data on pollutants  such  as  carbon  monoxide,  surveillance  cameras,  invasive 
species,  and  noise.  The  Copenhagen  Wheel  project  mapped 
levels  of  noise  or  air  pollution  by  assembling  geotagged  data 
sampled by bicyclists as they moved around town. In an earlier 
instance  of  distributed  sensing,  Pigeon  Blog  (2006),  took  air 
samples from  gas sensors  and  GPS readers  attached, like  paper 
messages of yore, to the legs of carrier pigeons.30 Many such DIY 
monitoring  projects  now  exist.  "Turn  your  mobile  phone  into 

        |        $ 0  %   ,   (   1   7      &   2 0  0  2   1   6
an  environmental  sensor  and  participate  to  the  monitoring  of 
noise pollution," invites NoiseTube, a Paris-based initiative sponsored by Sony.31 

The  use  of  personal  communication  devices  to  monitor, 
mix, and redistribute environmental data has a better name than 
"urban informatics," namely "citizen science." Eric Paulos, Ben 
Hooker, and  R. J. Honicky introduced this term as an expression  of  empowerment.32  Phones  become  data  instruments; 
streets  become  platforms;  aggregations  become  open-source 
communities, such as the data infrastructure platform Pachube' 
(now  Cosm).  Reports  and  displays  become  public  embellishments, often in ambient format, such as the data murals of water 
and  energy  usage  in  the  Arup  Bangaroo  project in  New  South 
Wales, Australia, that Dan Hill helped produce. Citizen science, 
then, is a use of technology for tuning in rather than out. Urban 
computing  becomes  alertness,  perhaps  even  resilience,  and  not 
mere  entertainment.  Paulos  and  colleagues  assert  what  this  is 
not:  "Urban  computing  is  not  a  disconnected  personal  phone 
application,  a  domestic  networked  appliance,  a  mobile  route 
planning application, an office-scheduling tool, or a social networking  service."33 Thus it  is also not just for casual outsiders, 
such as tourists and advertisers. It is not personalized, nor is it as 
usable  for  beginners  as  it  is  for  masters.  With  citizen  science, 
new  genres  of  urban  data  curation  such  as  urban  computing 
become a significant cultural domain.

 8  & L W \
Alas, too much occurs from the top down. Much of the rapidly 
urbanizing world is not so historic, civic, and complexly layered 
as  a  New  York-  or  London-based  flaneur  or  citizen  scientist 

  0   (   * $  &  ,   7   <      5   (   6   2 8   5   & (   6      |        
might  wish.  In  most  any  metropolis,  the  walkable  core  that 
attracts global business and tourism is surrounded by a far larger 
ring  of  less  centralized  conditions.  For  example,  many  of  the 
huge estates going up outside Beijing are designed to manage as 
many of their own infrastructural needs as possible. Many of the 
smart cities that get so much airplay from their corporate stakeholders constitute a case as different from core-city wayshowing 
and neighborhood citizen science as these are from one another. 
Layering means less in places where nothing preexists and where 
the technological emphasis is on ubiquity instead of augmentation.  Hardly  the  sites  of  postmodern  cultural  juxtaposition, 
these smart cities are exercises in late modernist cybernetics: digital  nervous  systems  of  command  and  control.  Resource  economics  dictates  this  more  than  any  drive  toward  political 
aggrandizement.  A  truly  smart  city  would  reduce  some  of  the 
biggest  logistical  sources  of  carbon  emissions,  material  waste, 
time delays, and emergency unpreparedness.

South  Korea  regularly  lays  claim  to  being  the  most  networked nation on earth, as measured in rates of usage, availability, and capacity of its communications infrastructure. Seoul has 
demonstrated  many  everyday  situated  technology  practices 
already: it is a leader in the use of QRC tagging; its Galleria West 
facade (2004) was among the earliest instances of programmable 
media facades. In remarkable contrast to the Parisian kiosks of 
the Victorian era (figure 9.4a), Seoul's Gangnam District "media 
poles" (2009; figure 9.4b) provide new instances of the sidewalk 
arts and events kiosk, now in LED technology, at obelisk scale, 
12 meters (40 feet) tall. So it was reasonable for South Korea to 
be the first country to lay claim to the expression "u-City" (with 
"u"  for  "ubiquitous").  According  to  Jong-Sung  Hwang  of  the 

        |        $ 0  %   ,   (   1   7      &   2 0  0  2   1   6
(a) Paris, ca. 1880, in painting by Jean Beroud (Walter Art Museum/Creative Commons).
      Street kiosks then and now.

  0   (   * $  &  ,   7   <      5   (   6   2 8   5   & (   6      |        

(b) Gangnam District media poles, Seoul, seoulspace, 2009. Photo: courtesy of seoulspace.
        |        $ 0  %   ,   (   1   7      &   2 0  0  2   1   6
National  Information  Society,  no  less  than  twenty-two  u-City 
projects  were  under  way  at  the  height  of  the  boom  in  2007.34 
Korea's leadership in infrastructure, its need to balance the boom 
of Seoul with development elsewhere in the country, and its centralized practices of construction consortiums combined to push 
ubiquity as an aspect of cultural identity. In "Living on a Platform," a survey of smart cities in 2010, the Economist led with 
New  Songdo  City,  the  most-cited  instance  of  full-scale  cybernetic  city  building  to  date.  In  a  Shanghai  World  Expo  exhibit 
that year, the networking giant Cisco demonstrated "all the digital  plumbing"  underlying  Songdo.  For  example,  in  a  mockup 
command  center,  "visitors  were  given  a  demonstration  of  how 
city managers would react to an accident on a city-centre bridge: 
cameras zoom in, an ambulance is dispatched, traffic is rerouted 
to other bridges--all automatically, within seconds."35

Today, post-economic crash, Songdo sits less than halfway 
completed,  a  self-evident  critique  of  top-down  urbanism  from 
the  standpoint  of  bottom-up  arts  and  sciences.  The  everyday 
online media are filled with outpourings on Songdo and its ilk. 
Masdar, the United Arab Emirates project for a top-down smart 
green  city,  is  mocked  for  being  built  on  oil  revenue  and  surrounded  with  the  shantytowns  of  those  who  built  it  but  can't 
afford to live there.

To  anyone without  a stake,  such digital  utopias may  seem 
like technology for technology's sake. Or worse, a smart city can 
be  a  perfect  dystopian  union  of  technology,  capital,  and  distracted  urban  subjectivity.  So,  by  contrast,  consider  the  introduction of media bottom up, on the other side of the economic 
and cultural divide.

  0   (   * $  &  ,   7   <      5   (   6   2 8   5   & (   6      |        
 7 H O H F H Q W H U V
Much  experience  of  infrastructural  access  occurs  in  circumstances directly opposite those of any u-City: bottom up, undercapitalized, mostly undocumented, relatively low tech. Although 
access  in  these  circumstances  receives  less  systematic  study,  it 
needs to be recognized for its potential.

In particular, the mobile phone has brought network experience  to  far  more  city  dwellers  than  any  other  technology.  The 
economic  advantages  of  connectivity,  findability,  and  location 
may be all the greater to those with no other information infrastructures  at  hand  and  with  no prospects  for  top-down  investment  or  appropriation.  Anthropologist  and  photoblogger  Jan 
Chipchase has explored how this new bottom-up layer, often the 
first  information  infrastructure  in  a  locale,  relates  to  other 
resource networks and how it can show privileged digerati ways 
to develop  without imposing  technology for the less  wealthy.36 
The  models  of  use  are  not  those  of  consumption,  hurriedness, 
ubiquitous service and support networks, or the presumed constant need for entertainment. And, in contrast to the dislocated 
experience of developed global cities by digital nomads such as 
Chipchase  himself,  these  bottom-up  patterns  can  only  be  situated in material circumstances and the intrinsic information of 
things.

Consider the case of "tap attendants," who wait by an intermittently active standpipe for the water to run, and then manage 
the queue of customers with buckets to be filled, charging each 
customer a small fee. Nabeel Hamdi, a leading voice on participatory  urban  development,  has  remarkable  stories  about  these 
everyday  infrastructure  workers,  who  are  often  children.  In  a 
corrupt  situation,  an  attendant  might  pay  the  city  a  certain 

        |        $ 0  %   ,   (   1   7      &   2 0  0  2   1   6
amount from the fees collected in order to receive water at this 
standpipe only on his or her watch, and then surcharge customers for a more predictable outcome. Another such tap attendant 
service on the rise is the recharging of mobile phones, for a fee 
payable in minutes of phone service.

One way to avoid such gatekeeping is to put the infrastructure access in the open, usually through what are called "telecenters," with governance bottom up among existing neighborhood 
or village councils, as in a commons. India began to install such 
telecenters around 2000, under an initiative named "Gyandoot," 
in  which  a  pilot  project  set  up  about  forty  of  them,  some  as 
storefronts and some as roadside kiosks, each designed to serve a 
dozen or more nearby villages. The project received democracyand-technology  awards  internationally.  Soon  the  market  took 
the  kiosk  telecenter  format  to  a  larger  constituency.  By  2007, 
there were some 6,000 e-Choupal telecenters in India. Whereas 
the  state  centers  served  mainly  to  get  government  information 
out to the villages, the private centers were more often operated 
business to business, sometimes as commons, especially for the 
benefit of farmers.

Operations and practices of the telecenters reflected the status 
and practices of appointed villagers. Terms of engagement differed 
from place to place and often improvised metaphors and tokens of 
use  that  were  quite  outside  technologists'  expectations.  For,  as 
Paul Dourish and Genevieve Bell have observed, this fresh "experience of infrastructure" reveals patterns of culture: "We refer not 
simply to physical infrastructures but more broadly to infrastructures as fundamental elements of the ways in which we encounter 
spaces--infrastructures  of  naming,  infrastructures  of  mobility, 
infrastructures of separation, infrastructures of interaction, and so 

  0   (   * $  &  ,   7   <      5   (   6   2 8   5   & (   6      |        
on."37 The telecenters revealed the complementary nature of technical and social patterning.

When  it  comes  to  the  economics  of  attention,  megacity 
resource  networks  behave  quite  differently  from  more  familiar 
patterns  of  media  consumption.  For  one  thing,  there  must  be 
intrinsic information in an urban resource commons, as well as 
social  sensemaking  and  physical  mise-en-sce`ne.  Neighborhoods 
that are undercapitalized fiscally may use new networking technologies to apply other, nonfiscal kinds of capital, such as cultural 
customs of access and use. Thus the kiosk telecenter format has 
been put to use by larger organizations such as the housing rights 
coalition Slum and Shack Dwellers International (SSDI), which 
now operates in thirty-three countries. In contrast to the "bottom 
of  the  pyramid"  metaphor  used  by  market  analysts,  which  presumes that higher outside forces will be the main instigators and 
beneficiaries of resource schemes, this networked commons metaphor presumes that millions of local organizations will uphold 
locally  intrinsic  value  better,  and  thus  provide  advantages  that 
larger, more remote markets and states simply can't.

Well-meaning  outsiders  need  to  research  such  topics  in 
greater depth, but they also need to proceed with caution. The 
cultural  workings  of  attention  may  reveal  which  technology 
appears  advantageous,  and  which  is  merely  a  contrivance. 
Whereas, in the most highly developed cities, there is a danger of 
romanticizing the technology, in the less developed ones, there is 
a danger of romanticizing the anthropology.

 8 U E D Q  5 H V R X U F H  3 D U W Q H U V K L S V
Can urban computing lay the cultural groundwork for other tangible  information  commons?  What  would  it  take  to  spread  best 

        |        $ 0  %   ,   (   1   7      &   2 0  0  2   1   6
practices  into  more  cities,  across  more  social  divides,  and  into 
more  resource  pools? Even  the  small  set  of  cases  here  suggests  a 
larger  prospect.  Urban  resource  partnerships  take  on  aspects  of 
commons. As the economist Elinor Ostrom explained: "The key 
to  a  more  effective  [commons]  model  is  to  encourage  self-organized  contracts  between  local  participants  in  context."38  As  the 
street-level  media  pioneers  Julian  Bleecker  and  Nicholas  Nova 
have  explained,  the  patterns  of  use  that  gather  around  shared 
streams  of  public  environmental  data  make  them  into  tangible 
social objects that are more accessible to casual social attention.39 

Cases  already  exist  in  water  quality,  biodiversity,  energy 
leaks,  and  the  right  to  see  the  dark  night  sky.40 Economists  of 
networked social production have shown how nonmarket, nongovernmental  organizations  can  help realize  the value,  and  not 
just the fiscal value, of hyperlocal resources, and not just material 
resources, but also the kinds measured by the Human Development  Index.41 The  dynamics of  housing,  water, power,  transit, 
currency,  opportunity,  expertise,  public  health,  and  environmental  health--these  have  become  the  agenda  in  urban 
computing.

How the ambient truly becomes a commons may take a lifetime to discover. Some already apparent aspects of the way forward,  including  changing  notions  of  commons  itself,  deserve 
more inquiry in the chapter ahead. But before turning to that, 
another, perhaps even more fundamental aspect of urban computing  as  psychogeography  deserves  emphasis  here.  After  all, 
media  do  not  simply  annotate  a  preexisting  city  but  also  help 
create  new  understandings,  uses,  and  tacit  geographies  of  the 
city. So this is really a question of attention to surroundings, and 
that is a fundamental theme in urbanism. 

  0   (   * $  &  ,   7   <      5   (   6   2 8   5   & (   6      |        
 ' L V W U D F W L R Q  5 H F R Q V L G H U H G
This  inquiry  into  attention  gains  perspective  from  an  environmental history of information. In an age of embodied information,  seen  here  from  the  perspective  of  participatory  urban 
computing, age-old expectations about distracted urban life my 
no longer seem quite so accurate. There has been a change in the 
nature of distraction.

Although it may always have existed, and by now the advertising industry has made it seem nearly universal, an attitude of 
distracted irreverence once was less usual, and the topic of a new 
sociology.  Scholars  of  a  mindful,  resistant  urbanism  still  recite 
Georg  Simmel's  1903  portrait  of  distraction,  "The  Metropolis 
and  Mental  Life,"  in  which  "there  is  perhaps  no  psychic  phenomenon which is so unconditionally reserved to the city as the 
blase'  outlook."42  Presciently,  but  not  so  uniquely,  Simmel  saw 
money  steadily  replacing  all  other  forms  of  social  exchange  (a 
process that continues today in what social media tycoons now 
call  "monetization").  Like  other  early  sociologists,  he  saw  a 
steady  decline  in  everyday  opportunities  for  spontaneous  personal  engagement,  as  city  dwellers  dealt  more  with  strangers, 
identified  less  with  groups,  spent  much  more  time  alone,  and 
worked as cogs in some giant machine. 

For as postmodern critics so often protested, visual culture 
itself  industrialized;  and  in  the  process,  so  did  attention.  The 
interplay of distraction and attention only took modern form in 
the last third of the nineteenth century. That is when William 
James  began  to  explore  it,  for  one.  Industrialization  had  made 
attention  into something  to pay, not  only when  attending factory machines, but also with respect to visual culture. As art historian Jonathan Crary observed, "modern distraction was not a 

        |        $ 0  %   ,   (   1   7      &   2 0  0  2   1   6
disruption  of  stable or `natural' kinds  of  sustained, value-laden 
perception  that  had  existed  for  centuries  but  was  [instead]  an 
effect,  and  in  many  cases  a  constituent  element,  of  the  many 
attempts to produce attentiveness in human subjects."43 Through 
careful  reading  of  both  early  texts  of  the  then-formative  discipline  of  psychology  and  selected  paintings  from  the  period, 
Crary was able to identify attention as a new idea. "Not until the 
1870s  does  one  find  attention  consistently  being  attributed  a 
central and formative role ..."44

In  what  became  his  more  lasting,  unique  contribution, 
Simmel  reacted  against  this  new  sense  of  attention.  Whereas 
"anomie,"  introduced  by  his  more  influential  contemporary, 
Emile Durkheim, conveyed a general sense of disconnected outlook, "blase'" and its English equivalents "blunted" and "dulled" 
expressed  it  in  more  personal,  perceptual  terms.  In  a  fittingly 
industrial metaphor, "blase'" means worn down through excess, 
not only from the labor or pollution that many sociologists protested,  but  also  from  unprecedented  diversity  of  demands  on 
attention, or as Simmel put it, "incapacity to react to new stimulations with the required amount of energy."45

This incapacity arises from the need to shift attention quickly 
and often. In what may be the most famous passage from "The 
Metropolis  and  Mental  Life,"  the  fatigue  that  dulls  and  blunts 
comes from "the intensification of nervous stimulation, resulting 
from the rapid telescoping of changing images, pronounced differences in what is grasped at a single glance, and the unexpectedness  of  violent  stimuli."46  Or,  in  another  translation,  it  results 
"from the rapid crowding of changing images, the sharp discontinuity in the grasp of a single glance, and the unexpectedness of 
onrushing  impressions.  These  are  the  psychological  conditions 

  0   (   * $  &  ,   7   <      5   (   6   2 8   5   & (   6      |        
which the metropolis creates." Long before handheld communications, outdoor video, or electronic ink, the flood of stimuli was 
enough  to  make  distinctions  among  its  elements  vanish,  giving 
rise  to  city  dwellers'  characteristic  "blase'  attitude,"  whose 
"essence" Simmel described as "an indifference to the distinctions 
between things."47

Although  Simmel's  larger  work  on  political  economy  has 
been largely forgotten, his particular focus on dulled subjectivity 
eventually resonated with the late twentieth-century critics, who 
revived him.48 As consumerism reached unprecedented levels in 
the 1980s, Simmel seemed far ahead of his time on the experience  of  fragmented,  decontextualized,  desire-inducing  media. 
Postmodernists  found  Simmel's  essayistic,  anticomprehensive 
style appealing.49 For, as they would have put it, the blase' privileged the reader. They agreed how the response of city dwellers to 
the readymade life, its furnished worldviews, and its endless overstimulation, was to become highly arbitrary and distinct in one's 
tastes.50 The unprecedented material benefits (electricity, sanitation, transit, communications) that modern cities provided their 
citizens made that possible.51 Although distraction and overload 
could  occur  in  any  culture,  modernity  offered  more  means  to 
become comfortably numb. Or, in Simmel's words: "as a protection  of  the  inner life  against the domination  of  the  metropolis, 
the reaction of the metropolitan person to those events is moved 
to a sphere of mental activity which is least sensitive and which is 
furthest removed from the depths of the personality."52

Today,  the  onrushing  impressions  have  become  more 
numerous,  more  subtle,  and  more  widely  distributed  than  in 
Simmel's time. This is the usual qualification that twenty-firstcentury  critics  make  to  the  argument  that  people  have  always 

        |        $ 0  %   ,   (   1   7      &   2 0  0  2   1   6
experienced overload. Yes of course they have, but not so often, 
not in so many different aspects of everyday life as now, and not 
by such easy means. The harsh industrial distractions of city life 
have  waned;  there  are  fewer  things  belching  steam,  soot,  and 
noise at such intensity. Today, much more in the flood of stimuli takes the form of intentionally produced, subtly appealing or 
entertaining,  widely  distributed  media  productions.  You  may 
experience ever more of these productions involuntarily, in part 
because they so pervade the activities of your lives that despite all 
diligence you cannot keep up with the filtering. But then, more 
significant  to  this  inquiry,  the  flood  of  stimuli  also  occurs  at 
street level, where it is even more difficult to escape. 

In short, never has distraction had such capacity to become 
total.  Enclosed  in  cars,  often  in  headphones,  seldom  in  places 
where encounters are left to chance, often opting out of face-toface meetings, and ever pursuing and being pursued by designed 
experiences,  postmodern  posturban  city  dwellers  don't  become 
dulled into retreat from public life; they grow up that way. The 
challenge is to reconnect.

Meanwhile, the experience of information overconsumption 
has developed a much more participatory, social infrastructure. 
Simmel  was  witnessing  the  rise  of  one-to-many  commercial 
media,  albeit  before  electronic  broadcast  technologies  brought 
them  to  the  center  of  everyday  life.  The  postmodernists  who 
revived Simmel were witnessing the absurd extremes at the end 
of  one-to-many  media  dominance--the  1980s  were  the  last 
decade  of  television  monoculture.  And  the  urban  computing 
pioneers  who  today  translate  an  interest  in  Simmel  forward  to 
the age of  personal street-level  media are  witnessing the rise  of 
many-to-many, or what some call "read/write" urbanism. Where 

  0   (   * $  &  ,   7   <      5   (   6   2 8   5   & (   6      |        
an  ethics  of  street  computing  engenders  citizen  science  and 
notions  of commons,  the microstructure of  engagement stands 
in dramatic contrast to the disengagement of city dwellers dulled 
by mass media.

In sum, a different sense of overload seems inevitable at each 
different stage in the history of environment, information, and 
technology.  To  someone  displaced  from  traditional  rustic  life, 
where  that  tradition  seems  recent  and  memorable  enough  for 
constant comparison, urbanism amplifies the sense of displacement,  or  anomie.  To  someone  who  grew  up  in  postindustrial 
sprawl, with disembodied friendships, nonstop media feeds, and 
informational empty calories, urbanism represents a prospect for 
relative sanity, or at least a richer mix of perceptual options, and 
a better balance among information about, for, and as the world.

This voluntarily urban citizen prizes attention skills, defends 
attention  rights,  and  takes  time  for  attention  restoration.  And 
that seems quite different from sitting alone, grazing on favorite 
feeds, and hoping not to miss any messages. It also seems different from Simmel's shock  at the newly  electrified Berlin. Overstimulation may be more subtle, widespread, and appealing than 
before,  but  blase'  has  become  less  of  an  option.  Those  who  go 
blank  become  only  more  vulnerable  to  thoughtless  overconsumption,  even  attention  theft.  Instead,  the  best  defense  is  to 
choose  to  take  interest,  and  to  help  your  sensibilities  slowly 
evolve.

How newer megacities now urbanize will have more impact 
than  what  the  existing  metropolises  do  next.  This  process  is 
much more difficult to study, to capture with art installations, or 
to read  or write books about.  Millions  of people  now network 
their  local  resources,  organize  governance  where  markets  and 

        |        $ 0  %   ,   (   1   7      &   2 0  0  2   1   6
states have missed doing so, uphold nonfiscal capital in nontraditional ways, use embodied media to form their images of the 
city, and so recast their workings of attention.

        0 ( * $ & , 7 <  5 ( 6 2 8 5 & ( 6
   0 D L Q  L G H D     8 U E D Q  F R P S X W L Q J  L Q H Y L W D E O \  W U D Q V I R U P V  D W W H Q W L R Q  W R  
     F R Q W H [ W

   & R X Q W H U D U J X P H Q W     ' R Q · W  L P S R V H  W H F K Q R O R J \ . H \  W H U P V   8 U E D Q      
     L Q I R U P D W L F V   S V \ F K R J H R J U D S K \   U H V R X U F H  Q H W Z R U N V

   : K D W  K D V  F K D Q J H G     % R W W R P  X S  H F R Q R P L F V  R I  U D S L G  X U E D Q L ] D W L R Q
   & D W D O \ V W     0 R U H  N L Q G V  R I  U H V R X U F H  R U J D Q L ] D W L R Q V
   5 H O D W H G  I L H O G     6 P D U W  F L W L H V
   2 S H Q  G H E D W H     1 R Q  P D U N H W  Q H W Z R U N H G  S U R G X F W L R Q "

 

   ( Q Y L U R Q P H Q W D O  + L V W R U \
Information deserves its own environmentalism. The more that 
information technology permeates everyday life, the more inescapably  it  alters  personal  and  cultural  sensibilities.  Of  course, 
the  physical patterns  of  everyday  life can  be  just as  telling  as  a 
culture's art or politics. Thus, one culture, whose citizens variously  walk,  ride  bicycles,  drive  cars,  and  take  streetcars  to  get 
from place to place, might assume they need little instruction to 
share the streets, whereas another, whose citizens almost always 
move around in cars, might need plenty of signage, and might 
sometimes use parking restrictions to avoid unanticipated social 
mixing. To understand such cultural differences, it can help to 
see their many usage patterns as a landscape. It can also help to 
see  cultural  landscapes  in  historical  perspective.  It  can  help  to 
see such larger patterns as "cultural landscape." In a widely-read 
definition  of  landscape,  the  design  critic  Paul  Shepheard  once 
advised  that  "the  big  moves  in  [a  cultural]  landscape  happen 
very  rarely.  You  will  be  lucky  to  see  one  during  your  lifetime 

        |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
and even luckier to be involved in the making of it. Incremental 
changes happen all the time, however."1

Today's big  moves  are happening as humanity  rethinks its 
role  on  earth.  Countless  incremental  moves  contribute  to  that 
epochal  change,  and  in  the  process  transform  the  relations  of 
environment and technology. Although mechanistic modernists 
dismissed it  as  romanticism and  technofuturists  dismissed it  as 
irrelevant to a disembodied cyberspace, today environmentalism 
has become the most practical attitude of all. The word landscape 
had its origins in naturalistic romanticism. One way to outgrow 
that attitude is to understand many more contexts as "environment"2--not  just  places  untouched  by  technology,  but  also 
buildings, cities, and their diversifying layers of information.

 ' L V S R V L W L R Q   + L V W R U \   D Q G  & U L W L F L V P
Few words have become so overexposed or misused as environment. So long as it meant someplace large and far away, outside 
of  technology  and  beyond  human  agency,  the  "environment" 
was  difficult  to  imagine,  much  less  to  engage.  And  so  long  as 
information  technologies  were  considered  in  the  abstract--
having neither place nor substance--they could hardly shape an 
environmental imagination. That is now changing. Information 
technology  builders  are  devoting  more  time  and  attention  to 
environment; and  environmentalists,  for  their part,  are  finding 
more to like about pervasive computing. As the conceptual gap 
between  technologists  and  environmentalists  closes  and  critical 
projects in smart green technology become realities, it is worth 
sorting out environmental terms as they are now used.

Environmental  disposition  describes  priorities  and  perceptions and implies both receptivity to figurative objects and events 

  (   1   9   ,   5   2   1   0 (  1  7  $  /      +   ,   6   7   2   5   <      |        
and awareness of the fields of space they share. That awareness 
might be visual, an awareness of the special light on Penobscot 
Bay that has attracted artists to Maine for generations, for example. It might be territorial, an awareness of the lay of the land, 
long and acutely cultivated by the military, or of city markings as 
these express tacit geographies of neighborhoods and gangs. Or 
it might be mythological, an awareness of enchantment in landscape among members of ancient cultures. In an industrial society,  however,  any  environmental  disposition  is  likely  to  be 
countercultural, although those born into an age where environmental  crisis  is  an  ongoing  fact  of  life  might  have  difficulty 
imagining how recently this was so.3

The  character  of  "disposition"  is  more  substantial  than  it 
might  first  appear:  not  only  do  the  means  of  production  and 
notions of nature differ significantly from culture to culture, but 
so do the plant and animal species, the droughts and pathogens, 
and the shape of the land itself. In his 1997 book, Guns, Germs, 
and  Steel,  biological  historian  Jared  Diamond  showed  how  the 
Anglo-American mythology of "Manifest Destiny" in the overall 
westward  course  of  empire  was  based  in  biological  differences 
among continents, shaped by their physical geographies, rather 
than in race.4

Environmental  history  explores  a  two-way  relation  between 
cultural disposition and land transformation. To some historians, 
that modern California got its start in hydraulic methods of gold 
mining,  which  cultivated  technical  ingenuity  and  capitalization, 
helps explain why Silicon Valley is there and not somewhere else.5 
As  with  so  much  else  in  early  environmental  work,  historians 
simply tried to document environmental impact, often beginning 
with  political  economy.  Thus  a  slash-and-burn  agrarian  culture 

        |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
and one  whose members build  irrigation canals they must share 
and maintain are likely to have quite different worldviews. (That 
an  expression  like  "slash-and-burn"  has  become  a  widely  used 
metaphor in other disciplines attests to the growing reach of environmental thinking.) As first-generation environmental historian 
Donald Worster once declared: "In the old days, the discipline of 
history had an altogether easier task. Everyone knew that the only 
important subject was politics and the only important terrain was 
the nation-state."6 To study production was a change. The origins 
of the disciplinary shift have generally been credited to the midtwentieth-century French Annales school of economic historians. 
To make their discipline distinct, early environmental historians 
excluded  buildings  and  artifacts  from  their  scope.7  Only  more 
recently  has  the  now-established  discipline  accepted  the  need  to 
look  at  material  circumstance  in  order  to  question  cultural 
assumptions. The politics exposed are, more often than not, the 
mechanisms of everyday consumerism. Which patterns of life exist 
out of raw necessity, and which out of cultural assumption? Feedlots? Lawns? Green second homes? Nature stores?

Normally,  the  word  criticism  arises  in  arts  and  letters,  and 
has implications of taste. Its role of interpreting expression distinguishes it from mere complaint. Criticism implies the aspiration to improve indirectly by interpretation.8 This  differs from 
compiling so many random opinions, as some websites do. Critics must know not only what they like or dislike, but why. This 
comes  from  knowledge  of  a  genre,  based  on  appreciation  of  a 
medium's affordances and constraints, by which critics can compare works and see bodies of work.

The term environmental criticism was first advanced by literary  historian  Lawrence  Buell.  The  mission  of  environmental 

  (   1   9   ,   5   2   1   0 (  1  7  $  /      +   ,   6   7   2   5   <      |        
criticism, Buell  argued, was to help move the environmentalist 
agenda beyond protecting nature, beyond thinking of nature as 
independent of human settlements and morally superior to anything  made  by  humans.9  Changing  naturalism  was  also  a  concern  of  the  late  Welsh  novelist  and  critic  Raymond  Williams, 
whose  works  achieved  that  change  through  careful  shifts  away 
from  romanticizing  the  country,  as  if  it  could  not  exist  in  its 
present form without the city.10

The  term  environmental  artifice  might  seem  oxymoronic 
when viewed through the simplistic opposition of nature (good) 
versus artifice  (bad).  But artifice shapes  environmental dispositions, for better or worse. This could be as simple as crop irrigation  and  as  complex  as  biodiversity  upkeep  policies.  Although 
there are those who believe that any human intervention detracts 
from a place, as if the Golden Gate would be better without that 
big red bridge, designers must assume that appropriate intervention does overall good.

Among  forms  of  artifice,  the  city  has  the  greatest  inhabitability  and  persistence.  Although  urban  histories  often  suggest 
that geography is destiny, they mainly focus on city form itself; 
that is their environmentalism. More specifically, urban history 
looks  for  transformations  in  the  conception  of  space  itself 
through  the  evidence  of  city  form,  as  when  Paris,  in  the  midnineteenth century, cut broad straight boulevards through its old 
(and rebellious) medieval quarters. Urban history tells stories of 
infrastructure, whether sewers, railroads, or radio stations. It tells 
how the latest phases of technological development more often 
overlie their predecessors than eliminate them. It looks at repeating  elements  such  as  housing  types  and  their  relationships  to 
resource flows, whether of trains, water, or communications. On 

        |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
a larger scale, it studies the relationship of cities to their hinterlands. In a genre-changing turn, William Cronon's 1991 classic, 
Nature's  Metropolis,  showed  how  the  grain,  meat,  and  timber 
markets of Chicago transformed a thousand miles of hinterland 
and how this led to specialties in artifice, such as mail-order catalogs and refrigerator railroad cars.11

The history of the city offers vivid small instances of situated 
technology, especially as fittings to larger infrastructures. Thus, 
among  the  many  new  practices  that  arose  around  electrified 
underground rail access to city centers, the scurry of commuters 
through  Grand  Central  Station  led  to  giant  clocks,  escalators, 
and  fast  food.12  At  the  Horn  &  Hardart  automat  two  blocks 
from Grand Central, commuters faced wall-sized arrays of coinoperated little glass window that opened onto plates of food.

Formerly  separate  disciplines  of  urban  and  environmental 
history  first  converged  on  the  topic  of  pollution.  Both  traced 
how  industrialization  brought  not  only  unprecedented  squalor 
but also unprecedented wealth, part of which could be used to 
relieve  the  squalor.  Industrial  life  has  for  centuries  produced 
sludge and smoke, as well as advertising and noise. Doing anything  about  any  of  these  side  effects,  however,  is  only  a  recent 
development. This has also been true of pollution in largely nonindustrial societies such as India's, where the taboo against deliberate  contact  with  profane  waste  resulted  in  the  holy  Ganges 
being  ever  more  fouled  with  incompletely  cremated  corpses. 
Eventually,  however,  something  had  to  done;  the  authorities 
introduced carnivorous snapping turtles to clean up the river.13

In his 1936 landmark book, Technics and Civilization, Lewis 
Mumford observed that "the first mark of paleotechnic industry 
was  the  pollution  of  the  air."  "Neotechnic"  industry  shifted 

  (   1   9   ,   5   2   1   0 (  1  7  $  /      +   ,   6   7   2   5   <      |        
"from  destruction  to  conservation"  of  the  environment.14  For 
example, in nineteenth-century Pittsburgh, smoke and fire were 
discussed  aplenty,  but  to  describe  them  as  "pollution"  was  to 
think  of  them  as  correctable,  a  change  in  perspective  that 
occurred only much later.15 Famously, the Pittsburgh Survey of 
1907  brought  a  progressive  eye,  and  unprecedented  levels  of 
documentation,  to  the living  conditions  of  immigrant  labor  in 
that  notoriously  smoky  city.  After  World  War  II,  Pittsburgh 
began  to  reduce  and  scrub  off  the  soot  (figure  10.1).  Today, 

       Scrubbing the soot from 
Pennsylvania Station, 
Pittsburgh, 1948 (Heinz History 
Center). 

        |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
Pittsburgh  demonstrates  how  environment  and  livability  can 
eventually become economic generators in themselves.

Today marks another new era in the history of the city. As 
noted in the previous chapter, the majority of humanity is now 
urban. While migrations of the rural  poor to the megacities of 
the south have of course been the main drivers of this, note too a 
significant  shift  in  the  north,  particularly  in  America.  As  the 
environmental, social, and public health costs of suburban automobile  monoculture  have  become  evident  there,  housing 
demand has shifted from exurban McMansions back to walkable 
urban  neighborhoods.16  Once  the  towering  industrial  city  was 
the early environmentalists' epitome of what to avoid. Today, as 
made famous in David Owen's recognition of "Green Manhattan,"17 walkable cities turn out to be a much greener choice than 
sprawling suburbs. 

Walkability in dense neighborhoods happens to favor location-based  social  and  curatorial  media.  As  this  inquiry  has 
explored,  urban  computing  has  the potential  to  become  an art 
form,  a  civic  experience,  and  a  new  kind  of  information  commons. From an historical perspective on the relationship of environment and technology, this invites a basic question. How can 
electronic artifice bring alive a sense of belonging to the world, 
and not just suggest conquest, distraction, or escape?

 ( Q Y L U R Q P H Q W  L Q  W K H  + L V W R U \  R I  , Q I R U P D W L R Q
Histories  of  information,  which  became  abundant  during  the 
web boom, emphasized long-term change in literacy, not in the 
environment. A comprehensive environmental history of information  has  yet  to  be  written.  As  a  way  to  begin,  then,  let  us 
consider instances of environment in the history of information 

  (   1   9   ,   5   2   1   0 (  1  7  $  /      +   ,   6   7   2   5   <      |        
and  of  information  in  the  history  of  environment,  which  seasoned historians are now exploring. Our present inquiry simply 
seeks  to  connect  environmental  histories  with  future  prospects 
for augmented cities.

When the rise of the web challenged the dominance of print 
in the early 1990s, the history of information became a widely 
read genre. Much of this concentrated on the history of reading, 
which was then almost synonymous with print.18 Twenty years 
later, after a great diversification of mobile and embedded technologies has infused information media into everyday life, there 
is little talk of dematerializing into cyberspace. 

The  history  of  information  has  far  fewer  documentary 
sources available to it than does the history of technology, say, or 
the history of everyday domestic life, or that of national politics. 
The  kinds  of  circumstantial  and  ephemeral  formats  of  reading 
that are of historical interest in this age of media diversification 
seldom received  mention in the literary, artistic, or journalistic 
sources that historians typically mine. Indeed, the word information came into general use only in the nineteenth century.19

The rise of library science in the nineteenth century forced a 
conceptual switch from information as process to information as 
entity.20 Alberto Manguel, in his well-respected History of Reading, observed how "the system Callimachus chose for [the great 
library at] Alexandria seems to have been based less on an orderly 
listing of the library's possessions than on a preconceived formulation  of  the  world  itself.! .! .! .  With  Callimachus,  the  library 
became  an  organized  reading  space.! .! .! .  All  the  libraries  I've 
known reflect that ancient library."21 Manguel later wrote of his 
own  private  library  in  highly  ambient  terms,  as  an  aggregate 
assembled by chance, a mental sanctuary, made to be sat in by 

        |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
night for its mood, a mood that could be felt even before reading 
any books.22

It is this reified form of information that was scarcer in preindustrial  societies.  We  have  always  been  informed  of  something, 
and empires have usually had libraries, but only in recent centuries 
have most of us had access to organized collections of informative 
texts--symbolically encoded semantic entities--newspapers, journals,  and  books.  Each  increase  in  this  kind  of  information  was 
without  precedent;  at  any  stage,  it  might  have  seemed  like 
overload.23

"Contemporaries start to articulate the problem of the overabundance of books around the 1550s," Ann Blair has noted. "It 
does become a refrain."24 One much-quoted line from the early 
centuries of print that Blair has studied is from the philosophermathematician Gottfried Leibniz, who complained about "that 
horrible mass of books which keeps on growing."25

The English country house, for example, has been studied by 
literary scholars for its social practices of reading.26 It was here, in 
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, before significant revolutions in democracy and mass media, that the idea of abundant 
information began to take form. Here the opulence was not just 
palatial, but literary. Polite society expected gentlemen to be current  on  all  the  latest  literature.  Private  libraries  had  come  into 
existence, and this, too, distinguished the great halls from ordinary houses, many of which had only a prayer book or Bible, if 
any book at all.27 Some of these libraries included new forms of 
reference materials that are of historical interest today. In a Jonathan  Swift  story  from  1704,  there  is  a  much-quoted  passage 
about  the  new  practice  of  index  skimming,  which  was  done  in 
order to proclaim familiarity with as much learning as possible: 

  (   1   9   ,   5   2   1   0 (  1  7  $  /      +   ,   6   7   2   5   <      |        
"Thus men catch knowledge by throwing their wit on the posteriors  of  a  book,  as  boys  do  sparrows  by  flinging  salt  upon  the 
tail."28 Such  skimming  was  but  a  small part  of  the  information 
experience of the times, however, which was expanding in a variety  of  ways.  Postal  traffic  increased.  Newspapers  expanded  in 
number,  size,  and  frequency  of  publication.  Ledgers  and  other 
business records (which in ancient times had been the first purpose  of  writing)  became  more  substantially  organized.  Maps  of 
faraway  places  held  special  interest,  especially  where  these  were 
the locales for business ventures.29 In examining this diversification  of  print,  and  given  how  written  communications  were  so 
often agents of change, the literary historian Katherine Elison has 
found  information  overload  in  the  country  house  described  as 
"fatal news."30 Even as it began to be understood in itself, information was something overwhelming, even threatening.

To information historians such as Marshall McLuhan, this 
period  of  print  diversification,  and  its  role  in  the formation  of 
modern capitalist nations, was just as revolutionary as the later 
electronic  age.  The  many  new  forms  of  print  later  so  basic  to 
everyday city life first played a prominent role in the eighteenth 
century, where they transformed the experience of reading, and 
more specifically that of sharing. Histories of information often 
thus emphasize the social uses of print. More widespread reading 
transformed  social  and  political  life.  Beyond  the  aristocratic 
salon and before the rise of public libraries (and the information 
sciences  with  them),  many  new  venues  and  practices  emerged, 
such as salons, shared private libraries, and clubs, like the famous 
Boston Athenaeum. To the skeptical, these were clear instances 
of  overload, both  for the increased  reading duties  and  for how 
those cut into social manners (figure 10.2).

        |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

The Victorian city was awash in print like no city before it. 
With  the  telegraph  to  send  news,  but  without  the  radio  to 
broadcast it, this was the golden age of newspapers. Life became 
much  faster,  uglier,  and  more  distracting.  Many  of  the  arts 
turned to realism; Emile Zola wrote vividly of all this in France. 
The print arts also increased their volume. In an oft-cited expression  of  glut,  one  follower  of  Zola  named  Octave  Mirabeau 
wrote:  "Books  rise,  overflow,  spread,  it's  an  inundation.  From 
overcrowded bookstores breaks a torrent of yellow, blue, green, 
and red, cascading from displays that make you dizzy."31

Enough archival materials remain that historians may construct  a  view  of  nonbook  text  in the  nineteenth-century  city,32 
which  invites  contrast  to  that  of  hypertext  in  the  twenty-first 
century.  Although  the  word  media  had  not  yet  come  into 
common use, the word public had, thanks in no small part to the 
influence  of  newspapers.  As  more  kinds  of  political  talk  could 
safely occur in the open, those who took part needed somewhere 
to  gather  casually.  In  contrast  to  the  private  country  house,  a 
new  site  of  reading  became  much  more  readily  available:  the 
public coffeehouse. Here was a new kind of environment where 
the availability of information (although that word was not yet 
in use) was the reason for being. Instead of one person reading to 
many, or many all talking about one thing they had read, each 
patron sat reading something of his own (as women were generally excluded), and occasionally offering remarks from it to the 
others  with  whom  he  kept  company.  Although  coffeehouses 
receive little mention even in the work of contemporary writers 
known  for  their  detailed  portraits  of  life,  such  as  Laurence 
Sterne,  Samuel  Johnson,  and  their  seventeenth-century  predecessor, Samuel Pepys, modern scholarship has shown how print 

  (   1   9   ,   5   2   1   0 (  1  7  $  /      +   ,   6   7   2   5   <      |        
       Overload amid early mass print: Everyone Reads Everything (Alles liest Alles), 1830, painting of a Berlin coffeehouse by Gustav Friedrich Taubert 
(Staatliche Museum Berlin/BPK).

        |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
communications  became  somehow  experiential  there,  in  ways 
aided by the coffee, of course.33

On  the  street,  amid  placard  bearers  and  sandwich  men, 
young  boys  pushed  handbills  about  new  coffeehouses  into  the 
hands of passers-by (figure 10.3). Others sold daily sheets of ship 
arrivals  and  market  goods  and  prices.  Earlier  forms  of  these 
papers, named for the Venetian gazzetta coins used to buy them, 
have  been  identified  as  the  first  instances  of  print  advertising, 
and as precursors to the industrial newspaper. Handbills and circulars  passed  from  person  to  person  about  deals  of  the  day 
became  dominant  forms  of  advertising.34  Business  cards  were 
offered by those in particular trades, and calling cards presented 
for  social  purposes--elegant  precursors  to  Facebook.  The  mail 
was delivered more than once a day in some cities, as were newspapers. The bustle of hand-delivered written communications is 
difficult to imagine in an age of instantaneous electronic surrogates. Only a few bicycle couriers remain, rare enough to be considered stylish.

Walls  adjoining  sidewalks  were  prime  real  estate  for  communications. A few surviving images of that era appear in today's 
civic campaigns against current flyposting practices that are but a 
shadow of what existed before glossy magazines, television, and 
Internet shopping.  Posted  bills  seem  distinctly  characteristic to 
the  street  scenes  of  the  early  nineteenth  century  (figure  10.4), 
when color lithography had been developed, but not yet applied 
to mass-produced, domestically consumed magazines.

In  his  remarkable  book  on  the  written  word  in  the  public 
spaces  of  antebellum  New  York  City,  urban  historian  David 
Henkin has explored the significant contribution of casual, individually  produced  forms  of  printed  papers  to  the  urban 

  (   1   9   ,   5   2   1   0 (  1  7  $  /      +   ,   6   7   2   5   <      |        

       Surviving handbill from 
what is thought to be London's first 
coffeehouse, 1664 (British Library). 

experience,  amid  the  proliferation  of  official  street  signage  and 
fixed commercial signs. Less like enduring inscriptions and more 
like speech acts, these more incidental writings were precursors 
of  today's  mobile  texts,  many  serving  as  what sociologists  now 
call  "presentation  of  self."  They  publicly  let  others  know  of  a 
social  or business  presence, and  in doing  so became part  of  an 

        |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
ever-changing aggregate layer of the city.35 Conversely, this layer 
let strangers know that they had a right to be present. Only with 
the Industrial  Revolution  did most  cities  become  large enough 
to  be  full  of  outsiders,  immigrants,  and  transients.  Until  this 
happened,  most  locations,  wayfinding,  and  local  regulation 
could be adequately conveyed by custom or by word of mouth. 
This shift toward outsiders led to the modern sensibility of city 
dwellers and to the sense of distraction that so preoccupied later 
urbanists, such as Simmel. To Henkin, "we are both embraced 
and alienated; the city acknowledges and addresses us, but keeps 
us moving at an impersonal distance."36

Tourism  takes  acknowledgment  of  newcomers  to  an 
extreme. Anyone disoriented in an unfamiliar city becomes more 
reliant  on  environmental  graphics.  Then  when  visitors  speak 
well of sites where the orientation process is pleasant, and where 
they find what they want, soon the traffic increases. This process 
economically  rewards  destinations  that  not  only  orient  visitors 
but confirm their expectations. Thus, more than any other urban 
activity, tourism furnishes interpretations. This, too, has its origins in the early age of print, when guidebooks first appeared, as 
for Paris after the revolution.37

Like GPS today, this early wayshowing supplanted nontextual  reading  of  intrinsic  structure.  As  noted  in  the  chapter  on 
tagging, the architecture of the city aims to represent institutions 
(or other prominent parties) to their constituencies in ways that 
make  sense  without  explanation.  Architecture  orients  tacitly. 
Good city form is thought to be legible without interpretive signage. Tourists gravitate to such cultural landscapes because they 
feel better than most other, less orienting ones back home. Retail 
planners recognize that the highest returns per square foot come 

  (   1   9   ,   5   2   1   0 (  1  7  $  /      +   ,   6   7   2   5   <      |        
from neighborhoods that are not only walkable but also memorable in form and identity. But, paradoxically, the economics of 
consumerism then layers and reconfigures these pleasingly memorable  spaces  according  to  their  branded  formulas,  preempting 
and largely masking the intrinsic legibility that attracted visitors 
in the first place.

Historians  of  information  thus  need  to  expand  the  role  of 
environment beyond the sites of reading, to reexamine the distributed  application  of  information  to  the  innate  and  built 
world. There are several reasons why they have been slow to do 
so.  First,  what  we  are  calling  "intrinsic  information"  is  much 

       Flyposting in its heyday: A London Street Scene, 1835, watercolor by John Orlando Parry (Wikimedia Commons).

        |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
more ubiquitous, innately reflecting the process of being in the 
world. Second, intrinsic information dominates traditional societies,  where  cosmology  and  mythology  are  among  the  main 
components of what modern societies might simply call "information."  And,  third,  intrinsic  information  doesn't  further  an 
agenda of computation, whose rise has driven many quests for a 
prehistory of information.

Here  is  where  the  mainstream  discipline  of  environmental 
history comes into play. As Carolyn Merchant, herself a prominent  environmental  historian,  has  explained:  "Environmental 
history is both one of the oldest and newest fields within human 
history. All cultures have oral and written traditions that explain 
human origins  and  encounters  with the  natural  world through 
stories  about  local landscapes  and  ways  to  perpetuate life  from 
the  land."38  What  the  age  of  ambient  information  may  learn 
from premodern histories of environmental information is how 
to read the world in itself.

 , Q I R U P D W L R Q  L Q  W K H  + L V W R U \  R I  ( Q Y L U R Q P H Q W
Because  environmental  history  examines  human  relationships 
with "nature," and because the arts and letters best reveal those 
relationships, it follows that most information in the history of 
environment takes the form of narrative descriptions, especially 
in  myths  and  literature.  Historically,  especially  in  premodern 
cultures,  a  principal  role  for  literary  tradition  is  to  enchant  a 
people's place in a landscape.

Scholars,  notably  in  art,  linguistics,  anthropology,  political 
theory, and regional economic planning, have long studied these 
narratives and their graphic counterparts. Thus planning scholars 
have  examined  the  impact  of  geographic  information  systems 

  (   1   9   ,   5   2   1   0 (  1  7  $  /      +   ,   6   7   2   5   <      |        
(GIS) on cultural geography and land use patterns. More so than 
other, more ephemeral or poorly archived media such as printed 
broadsides or posted street signage, mapping demonstrates a longterm development of information media's environmental impact.

Throughout its long history, mapping has seemed inseparable from colonialism. To map a territory was to domesticate it, 
to  name  and  measure  a  former  terra  incognita.  Through  the 
unique combination of democracy, relatively undeveloped territory,  and  emerging  market  forces,  buying  and  selling  lands 
became  normal  in  early  American  history;  for  the  first  time, 
maps of these lands were owned and displayed by many members  of  society.  David  Hackett  Fischer  compared  folkways  of 
what were  quite  separate  cultures  in  Massachusetts,  Pennsylvania,  and  Virginia.39  America  was  many  separate  peoples  then, 
and  each  imposed  its  own  particular  cultural  geography:  the 
hub-and-spoke  roads  of  New  England,  the  small  metes-andbounds  counties  of  Kentucky,  and  the  later  Jeffersonian  grid 
from Ohio and Indiana westward.40

According to the main cultural narratives, not only was the 
land waiting to be developed, but this was its divine purpose and 
humanity's mission. Technology historian David Nye has examined  assimilation  of  nature  into  human  designs  as  the  basis  of 
several  American  foundation  myths:  "In  the  American  beginning,  after  1776,  when  the  former  colonies  reimagined  themselves as a self-created community, technologies were woven into 
national  narratives.  A  few  assumed  particular  prominence, 
among  them  the  axe,  the  mill,  the  canal,  the  railroad,  and  the 
irrigation dam .!.!. with America conceived as a second creation 
built in harmony with God's first creation."41 Few other cultures 
have made technology so intrinsic to their creation narratives.

        |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

The most visible case of second creation as an environmental consequence of an information practice can be seen best from 
an airplane: it is the Jeffersonian grid of the Midwest and Plains. 
Like  the  street  names  and  signs  of  postrevolutionary  Paris, 
America's 640-acre square of homestead land belongs to an era 
of standardizing measurement in the name of democracy, and to 
an agenda of bringing ownership to many more people. It illustrates how a change in the simple information practice of measurement can have huge consequences.42 The immediate reason 
to survey land is to establish title, often for sale. The newly surveyed  territories  of  the  nation's  Northwest  became  the  site  of 
speculative boom and bust just as dramatic as more recent Arizona subdivisions.

For a related example in the history of technology, perhaps 
the best retold tale is of railroads and their associated information 
media  crossing  these  gridded  prairies.  The  High  Plains  themselves  have  legendary  status  among  environmental  historians  as 
one of the few places in the developed world that are depopulating today. Historians now marvel at railroad-based inducements 
to  settle,  such  as  the  infamous  earth-science  category  error  that 
"rain follows the plow," or the distinct technological convergence 
of  railroad  deliveries  with steel  plows,  barbed-wire  fencing,  and 
harvesting machinery. The railroads depended on their own supporting  set  of  information  technologies.  Back  on  the  streets  of 
New  York,  handbills  induced  emigrants  westward  toward  the 
bounties of Nebraska life. Along their routes, railroads had switch 
and  signal  systems  of  their  own,  necessary  for  better  safety  and 
operations,  and  precursors  to  later  computational  disciplines  of 
queuing, from which the discipline of cybernetics emerged. Railroad  corridors  simultaneously  served  as  telegraph  trunk  lines. 

  (   1   9   ,   5   2   1   0 (  1  7  $  /      +   ,   6   7   2   5   <      |        
Cosmologically,  these  combined  technologies  "annihilated 
space," in the parlance of the day, and made necessary the systemization of timekeeping into discrete time zones, a loss of locality 
that  was  protested  vigorously.  Economically,  although  the  railroads were by far the largest capital entities yet, countless smaller 
new business practices grew up around them, some built on new 
information  practices,  such  as  cash-on-delivery  mail-order  catalogs. In an architecturally distinct example of information technology  in  environmental  history,  the  mail-ordered,  flat-packed, 
designed-for-assembly,  balloon-framed  house  gave  a  consistent 
look to a wide swath of new prairie towns.

For a twentieth-century case, consider radio as the first truly 
ambient information technology. Radio was the first "wireless" 
medium and the first said to be "on the air." Architecturally, it 
was  even  more  mysterious  than  electrification:  invisible  radio 
waves flowed right through walls. Much as bright lights glorified 
big cities, so did the broadcast radius of a prominent radio station.43  Much  as  electric  lighting  gave  evenings  at  home  many 
more  possibilities,  so  did  radio.  Together,  these  technologies 
transformed the domestic sphere in ways that might seem primitive  in  comparison  to  today's  enormous  home  theaters,  but 
which were the greater departure from past practices.

Radio  also  helped  annihilate  distance.44  It  began  the  nowfamiliar practice of broadcast weather forecasts. Like other ambient media today, it was quickly appropriated for advertising (figure 
10.5). Through its geography and its synchrony, radio created a 
unified  audience  in  ways  that  print  could  not.  It  also  diverted 
attention; as those who protest cell phone abuse today know only 
too well, a human voice talking to you out of thin air is harder to 
ignore than an embodied one engaged in conversation with others 

        |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
present. For this, McLuhan famously called the medium "hot"--
that is, not so ambient. Within a decade of its widespread adoption, radio  had  become notorious  for its capacity  to command 
attention,  a  power  that  was  dramatically  abused  by  Nazi  and 
Soviet totalitarian regimes. Intellectual counterreactions formed 
a core of media-cultural theory that persists to this day. As first 
expressed  by  the  Frankfurt  School,  broadcast  by  radio  (and  its 
successor, television) created undeniably spatial consequences in 
the configuration of cities for spectacle, distraction, and disinformation.  Although  this  criticism  began  from  the  perspective  of 
politics, it increasingly drew attention to media influences on the 
built environment, especially in the later age of runaway induced 
consumerism,  epitomized  by  the  "themeparking"  of  cities  into 
predictable pleasure zones, where all transactions are commercial 

       Editorial cartoon against early advertising by radio, National Radio News, August 1922 (earlyradiohistory.us).

  (   1   9   ,   5   2   1   0 (  1  7  $  /      +   ,   6   7   2   5   <      |        
and  documented,  nothing  of  any  consequence  occurs  unforeseen, and ever more aspects of human existence are monetized.

For a telling instance of the impact of information on environment,  nothing  quite  rivals  target  market  demographics. 
Mapping,  mediation,  and  monetization  increasingly  combine. 
Although less astonishingly geometric than the Jeffersonian grid, 
these  patterns,  too,  may  be  seen  from airplanes,  at  least  to  the 
trained  eye. The  some sixty Claritas  Prizm  database categories, 
used by the target market demographics industry for nearly forty 
years,  have  reinforced  differences  among  particular  "lifestyle 
clusters" at the spatial resolution of the zip code, in a self-fulfilling feedback loop of residential and business site selection, to the 
point where the entire cultural landscape appears sorted.45 As an 
agent  of  sprawl,  these information  technologies  appear to  have 
enforced economic and cultural stratification not only across the 
self-segregating social and political divisions for which the Internet age is so notorious, but also geographically.

Lifestyle  segmentation,  so  evident  on  a  regional  scale,  plays 
out  on  the  personal  scale  by  way  of  ambient  media,  especially 
ambient  advertising.  Consider  screens  in  a  room.  Many  if  not 
most of the large flat panel screens visible outside the home belong 
to  efforts  at  experience  design  to  induce  retail  consumption. 
"Media" in the broadcasting and networking sense don't necessarily enter these efforts; just as often the video programming simply 
cycles  through  a  locally  installed  loop  about  the  experiences  on 
offer right there. Tacit placement really counts. Advertising has, of 
course,  long  since  transcended  descriptions  of  products  and  services in favor of creating a lifestyle identity plus a general, indeed 
subliminally  universal,  awareness  of  the  brand.  Of  all  designers, 
advertisers most want their works to be ambient.

        |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

Because  advertisers  are  so  much  more  skilled  (and  numerous) than architects at connecting designed environments to sets 
of values and desires, there is a possibility that their contribution 
could increase, rather than erode, architectural awareness. Architect Anna Klingman has observed that branding can help communicate  the  "larger  socioeconomic  goals"  of  architecture  and 
planning,  and  thus  boost  interest  in  built  environments  and 
"enhance  the  value  that  consumers  place  on  spatial  experiences."46 Note the assumption that people are simply consumers. 
In  counterreaction,  if  relentless  sales  promotions  are  not  to 
crowd  out  moments  for  more  genuine  shifts  of  attention,  new 
forms of information in environmental history need to focus on 
something more than wayshowing and branding.

 $ P H U L F D Q  6 S D F H  5 H F R Q V L G H U H G
In the United States, ideas of the commons tend to fall on deaf 
ears or, worse, to meet with ridicule. Is it a distinctly American 
trait to undervalue the space between things? Many of the cases 
and examples above would suggest so. Recent developments in 
reurbanization and urban informatics also suggest, however, that 
a  watershed  in  environmental  history  might  be  occurring  even 
in America.

"American space" was influentially explained by the motorcycle-trekking scholar of the vernacular landscape John Brinkerhoff Jackson, who explained how it took form most distinctly in 
the  decades  that  followed  the  American  Civil  War.  It  is  commonly said that America began the Civil War as many agrarian 
states but ended it as one industrial nation. New combinations 
of  railroads,  telecommunications,  and  commerce  generated 
whole  new  landscapes,  not  only  in  the  West  but  also  in  the 

  (   1   9   ,   5   2   1   0 (  1  7  $  /      +   ,   6   7   2   5   <      |        
reconstructing South. With these came new ways of orienting to 
the world. To Jackson, this era's shift from romantic to technological attitudes toward landscape was the single most formative 
phase in American environmental disposition.

Jackson opened his influential American Space (1972) with 
the coffee-table book, which better than any other information 
practice portrayed the formation of a new and enduring disposition toward technology-enabled production of space in the first 
post-Civil War decade. "It was the spectacle of America busting 
out of its historic confines and taking possession of untrammeled 
space that engrossed the journalists and compilers of commercial 
photo books."47 This disposition was most evident in the smaller 
towns, where it produced the fenceless lawns and uniform rows 
of trees, especially in honor of the nation's 1876 centennial, that 
declared a "love of landscape"48 Writing exactly a hundred years 
later,  on  village-green  improvements  as  emblems  of  something 
much  larger,  Jackson  observed  "a  tendency  to  subdue  nature 
rather  than  cooperate  with  it,  an  unawareness  of  interaction 
instead of opposition between man and the world surrounding 
him."49

The age exalted second creation. Land was there to be developed, had little meaning unless developed, and could be developed 
in any  manner its  owner saw fit,  often with  total disregard for 
what others chose to do with theirs. In response to these disrespectful  practices,  Chief  Seattle  was  said  to  have  declared  that 
"the land does not belong us; we belong to the land." A century 
and a half of "Don't tell me what to do with my land" has produced  a  chaos  of  building  and  discontinuity  of  landscape  and, 
with it, an inherent disregard for what were once tacitly shared 
notions of commons.

        |        $   0   %   , (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

As  noted  above,  unprecedented  wealth  in  the  cities  was 
tapped to remedy unprecedented squalor there. Not only waterworks and sewers but also gas lights, elevators, buses, and telephones  gave  rise  to  the central  business  district,  the  park-front 
mansion, and the streetcar suburb. Amid a progressive age, more 
creative  work  turned  toward  environmental  criticism.  Thus 
Jackson  ended  American  Space  with  New  York  City,  which, 
amid great vitality and a burgeoning population, began both to 
consider itself  whole, as  an environment, and  to  improve itself 
with  monuments,  with  the  great  parks  that  did  so  much  to 
establish the discipline of landscape architecture, and with new 
architectural approaches to the problems of its slums, approaches 
that could for the first time be understood as environmental.50

The  ethos  of  second  creation  eventually  came  to  an  end, 
some say in 1916, when America encountered the horrors of the 
Great  War,  which  shattered  mechanistic  notions  of  progress; 
others  say  in  1893,  when  the  expansionist  culture  of  Manifest 
Destiny ran out of land, and Frederick Jackson Turner declared 
the frontier closed. Yet the frontier mentality persists to this day, 
more than a century later, as if the world were a free good, and 
consuming  it  should  be  accounted  as  income  and  not  capital 
depletion.

In sum, the attitudes of cultures toward their surroundings 
differ  widely.  Some  value  the  world  instrumentally;  others, 
intrinsically.51  Some  emphasize  things;  others,  connections. 
Some see the fish, so to speak, and others see the tank.52 A culture  with  far  more  land  than  people,  like  nineteenth-century 
America,  and  one  with  far  more  people  than  land,  like  Japan, 
develop quite different philosophies.

  (   1   9   ,   5   2   1   0 (  1  7  $  /      +   ,   6   7   2   5   <      |        
Not  even  planetary  change  has  shifted  that  bias  very  far. 
Despite  a  worldwide  consensus  on  the  need  to  become  more 
responsible  for  surroundings,  American  thought,  policy,  and 
technology continue to emphasize isolated objects and events at 
the  expense  of  their  context.  And  that  includes  information 
technology,  much  of  which  is  American  in  origin,  if  not  best 
practices. Almost no other culture puts so many media feeds into 
quite so many aspects of life with quite so little regard for context. You can feel the cultural difference as you exit airport customs and enter this most distracted of nations.

         ( 1 9 , 5 2 1 0 ( 1 7 $ /  + , 6 7 2 5 <
   0 D L Q  L G H D       , Q I R U P D W L R Q  G H V H U Y H V  L W V  R Z Q  H Q Y L U R Q P H Q W D O L V P
   & R X Q W H U D U J X P H Q W       , Q I R U P D W L R Q  O H D Y H V  I H Z  W U D F H V
   . H \  W H U P V     ( Q Y L U R Q P H Q W D O  K L V W R U \  R I  L Q I R U P D W L R Q   $ P H U L F D Q  V S D F H
   : K D W  K D V  F K D Q J H G       0 R U H  L Q W U X V L Y H   L Q H V F D S D E O H  P H G L D
   & D W D O \ V W       % U L Q J L Q J  H Q Y L U R Q P H Q W D O  V H Q V L E L O L W \  W R  P H G L D
   5 H O D W H G  I L H O G     & X O W X U D O  O D Q G V F D S H  V W X G L H V
   2 S H Q  G H E D W H     , V Q · W  L Q I R U P D W L R Q  W R R  H S K H P H U D O  I R U  H Q Y L U R Q P H Q W D O  
     K L V W R U \ "

 

   * R Y H U Q L Q J  W K H  $ P E L H Q W
How much is enough? For information, often the best solution 
to too much is more: metadata, opinions, histories, filters, and 
background documents help lead the way. To restrict information would be unacceptable: the communications rights of individuals  and  communities  must  be  inalienable,  insuppressible, 
and not for sale. Yet among those rights might be ownership of 
your personal data, and a right to undisrupted attention. Thus 
when  media  become  situated  and  persistent,  profound  challenges emerge in information ethics. Questions  of stewardship, 
expression,  privacy,  pollution,  and  attention  theft  all  intensify. 
To  a  generation  of  conscientious  users,  network  philosophers, 
policy wonks, and street-level activists, these problems may long 
remain topics of policy and debate. The need for governance has 
become difficult to ignore. Whether through unanticipated liberation,  ruthless  privatization,  or  sheer  volume,  ubiquitous 
information technology now influences even the most everyday 
cultural acts. Under these conditions, it may be costly to neglect 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
the role of augmented surroundings. For unlike the open Internet,  an  embodied  system  that  people  must  inhabit  imposes 
physical  and  experiential  limits;  more  is  not  always  better. 
Recall  the  consequences  of  those  attitudes  in  mobility  and 
housing. Now as shared physical spaces are flooded by media, 
corporations  enclose  cultural  commons,  and  the  dynamics  of 
participatory networks shift to street level, what particular concerns arise with the ambient? Is there now a tangible information commons?

 5 H F R J Q L ] L Q J  3 R O O X W L R Q
For one most obvious instance of these challenges, consider pollution. To ask whether information superabundance ever constitutes  pollution  seems  especially  problematic.  Questions  of 
intellectual  and  expressive  freedom  instantly  arise.  Seldom  has 
any  form  of  pollution  been  easy  for  a  culture  to  acknowledge. 
Even chemical pollution of the air, however visible, was seldom 
discussed as such before the nineteenth century, didn't become a 
dominant  cultural  theme  until  the  mid-twentieth  century,  and 
thus  has  a  history  that  would  mostly  fit  within  one  current 
human  lifetime,  if  you  date  from,  say,  Rachel  Carson's  Silent 
Spring (1962) or the Clean Air Act (1970).1 

Although today it is relatively easy to agree on what is wrong 
with dumping chemicals in the river, or that the right to dump 
anywhere  may  not  be  in  the  public  good,  filling  the  air  with 
messages  is  another  matter  altogether.  What  is  noise  to  one 
person may be vital communication to another, or to the same 
person  on  another  day.  To  declare  what  pollutes  is  to  censor, 
which is almost never a respectable act. Moreover, to claim the 
existence of information pollution is likely to add to it. How do 

  *   2   9   ( 5  1   ,   1 *     7   +   (      $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      |        
you protest a problem whose solution is to say less? Yet freedom 
of speech is not the same as freedom to drown others out. The 
freedom of anyone to be heard requires some restrictions on the 
freedom of others to persist and to amplify. These are complex 
concerns.

In  law,  nuisance  is  often  a  matter  of  degree. An  otherwise 
innocent act becomes an offense when done often enough, on a 
large  enough  scale,  or  in  enough  different  places  at  once.  You 
have the right to speak your mind, but not to amplify it to 100 
decibels all night, nor to hang it on banners on a building that 
you do not own. So, too, a company has a right to promote its 
brand, but perhaps not in a manner visible twenty miles away, 
nor on the doors to City Hall.

If a loud party goes on into the wee hours, it is no surprise if 
the  police  show  up.  Noise  pollution  seems  obvious  enough. 
Many augmented reality projects now document it (figure 11.1). 
For a similar phenomenon, this inquiry has noted the "discovery" of light pollution. When is the focus of fixtures so poor, or 
the  overall  volume  of  artificial  light  so  excessive,  as  to  become 
unhealthy  for  all  concerned?  Somewhere,  secret  police  subject 
detainees  to  unending  brightness.  Somewhere,  vacationers  pay 
top dollar for darkness, and a chance to do some stargazing.

Many towns now govern light pollution, with easily attainable  advantages.  By  improving  nighttime  visibility  while  conserving  power,  this  form  of  pollution  control  illustrates  the 
possibility  of  doing  more  with  less.2  This  begins  from  better 
design. Lighting experts say that you should see the effects and 
not the fixtures. The effect of visibility depends not so much on 
the  volume  of  light  as  on  the  absence  of  glare,  that  is,  on  not 
having too much light coming from any one direction. As with 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
conversations in a restaurant, speaking ever more loudly as background noise level increases definitely doesn't help; it only worsens  the  problem.  Instead  it  is  much  more  civil  to  find  a  pitch 
where you can talk under the background noise and keep your 
voice from carrying beyond your table. Similarly, light shouldn't 
trespass.  By  selecting,  aiming,  and  masking  light  fixtures  more 
effectively,  everyone  can  see  better  while  using  less  electricity. 
And with glare mostly gone, natural night vision has a chance to 
revive, and you can see some things with no lighting at all. You 
might also see the stars, and remember a larger (and planetary) 
place in the scheme of things.3

Often lit, now increasingly emitting light themselves, or just 
commanding  the  view  in  broad  daylight,  large  outdoor  signs 

       Early device for do-it-yourself environmental 
monitoring of noise pollution: Sensaris, 2009. 
Photo: sensaris.com.

  *   2   9   ( 5  1   ,   1 *     7   +   (      $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      |        
demand  similar  consideration.  Many  towns  have  signage  ordinances  against  full-motion  billboards  that  distract  drivers,  for 
example, or against excessively tall sign pylons. You can clearly 
tell where such ordinances are being enforced when, on one side 
of a town line, there are no pylons at all and even the gas station 
logos hug the ground. The environmental graphics industry has 
learned  these  subtler  ways  in  the  last  generation,  much  to  the 
displeasure of kitsch enthusiasts nostalgic for early, now historic 
strips such as Burnet Road in Austin and U.S. Route 1 just north 
of Boston.

Back when competition among sign owners on the strips was 
wide open and automobile mania was new, an eminent art critic 
published  a  general  environmental  lament.  Peter  Blake's  1964 
abundantly illustrated classic, God's Own Junkyard, was the most 
prominent work of the first wave of environmental    recognition 
after  Silent  Spring.  Actual  junkyards  were  much  more  plentiful 
then,  when  cars  lasted  only  a  few  years  and  material  reuse  was 
minimal. But to Blake, the real junkyards were the get-rich-quick 
commercial strips. "In destroying our landscape, we are destroying the future civilization of America,"4 Blake warned, with what 
now seems uncanny accuracy. The signage depicted in God's Own 
Junkyard  looks  primitive  and  innocent  by  today's  standards. 
Much  less  was  known  about  marketing  then.  But,  more  obviously, there were also far fewer signage ordinances.

Many soon followed. Some previous exceptions first deserve 
mention. The federal court had ruled in 1917 that it was a valid 
exercise  of  Chicago's  police  power  to  require  "consent  of  a 
majority of residents before a billboard could be placed in a residential  neighborhood."5  The  landmark  Highway  Safety  Act  of 
1936  had  brought  a  degree  of  moderation  to  the  era  of  serial 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
roadside messages, like the famed Burma-Shave advertisements.6 
That  early  history  of  roadside  signage  has  relevance  today  in 
debates  over  deadly  texting  while  driving  (figure  11.2).  Only 
with the rise of general environmentalism in the 1960s did local 
signage ordinances become the norm in America, however. Following the publication of God's Own Junkyard, followed by the 
passage of Lady Bird Johnson's famous Highway Beautification 
Act  of  1965,  and  eventually  the  publication  of  William  Ewald 
and Daniel Mandelker's influential street graphics law manual in 
1971,7 a wave of governance swept across the nation. Since then, 
various cities and advertising lobbies have gone back and forth 
on  the  constitutionality  of  signage  bans  and  separate  laws  for 
"commercial  speech,"  as  noted  in  the  chapter  on  screens,  with 
the  case  of  Los  Angeles's  political  expose'  and  moratorium  on 
electronic billboards in 2009.8

Context  is  vital  in  signage  law.  The  cultural  geographer 
Wayne Franklin once observed: "You will not fare well as a literalist in the world of signage. Most signs require a fitting sense 
of  context  and,  even  more,  a  tactful  regard  for  the  slippage 
inherent in all social situations and most texts."9 Thus, generally  speaking,  signage  ordinances  apply  fewer  restrictions  to 
"on-site" signs; to avoid falling into censorship, they restrict the 
placement rather than the content of speech and in such a way 
that other outlets are always available.10 And, as one sign industry organization explains, "many jurisdictions are amenable to a 
variance that would permit the renovation or retrofit of a building fac,ade in order to enhance a district theme."11 All told, signage  law  navigates  delicate  democratic  issues  for  the  greater 
good.  Sign  owners  avoid  the  costs  of  runaway  competition; 
localities  avoid  getting  covered  with  references  to  someplace 

  *   2   9   ( 5  1   ,   1 *     7   +   (      $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      |        

       Deadly distraction: an 
editorial cartoon by Herbert 
Johnson, The Roadside Bulletin 
(Vol. 2, No. 4), 1932.

else; citizens avoid having to look at quite so many eyesores; and 
yet nobody is silenced.

Achieving a more general communications commons seems 
much  more  difficult,  however.  Whereas  if  you  don't  filter  the 
pathogens from the air, you could become chronically ill; if you 
don't filter offensive ads from your daily experience, you won't 
suffer any obvious health consequences. Parents at the supermarket take great care in selecting the foods they buy for their families.  Yet,  on  returning  home,  they  may  leave  the  television  on 
with no such alertness about the ingredients. Preoccupied with 
chemical pollution, they are oblivious to information pollution.

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

This inquiry began with a look at the meanings of "information,"  and  the  possibilities  of  overload  or  overconsumption. 
Although  concerns  about  overload  date  back  centuries,  high 
anxiety over media that you cannot escape is far more recent. It 
began  before  smartphones,  nevertheless.  Fifteen  years  have 
passed  since  sociologist  David  Shenk  gave  an  early  warning: 
"Data smog gets in the way; it crowds out quiet moments, and 
obstructs  much-needed  contemplation.  It  spoils  conversation, 
literature, and even entertainment. It thwarts skepticism, rendering us less sophisticated as consumers and citizens. It stresses us 
out."12  As  noted  with  respect  to  media  facades,  background 
music, and surveillance, to name a few, any future environmental history of information would do well to reconsider anxiety as 
an effect of information pollution, especially where media practices coexist and persist in shared sites of life. For, without a way 
to talk about these issues, there may not be much to do about 
them, or with them, except to filter your own feeds and tune the 
rest out.

 , Q I R U P D W L R Q  ( W K L F V
Superabundance amplifies the costs of poor information ethics. 
Many  of  these  costs  have  become  everyday  realities:  spam, 
scams,  loss  of  privacy,  pornography,  identity  theft,  incivility, 
censorship,  polarization,  disinformation,  piracy,  spyware,  shutdowns, denial of service. On one level, these ills seem to belong 
to more general problems in ethics, where culture cannot keep 
pace with technological change, and where public education in 
the fundamentals of political philosophy and of the social contract has fallen by the wayside. On another more obvious level, 
weak  ethics  belong  to  the  frontier  mentality  of  the  Internet, 

  *   2   9   ( 5  1   ,   1 *     7   +   (      $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      |        
where  the  advantages  of  new  technology  so  outweigh  the  side 
effects that those increase as well. These regrettable ills and side 
effects might lie outside the scope of this inquiry if their becoming ambient did not so amplify them. So for the many experts in 
Internet culture, social science of media, environmental law, and 
ambient  interface  design  who  already  have  much  to  say  about 
superabundance (as the solution to too much information really 
often  is  more  information),  this  inquiry  offers  some  questions 
(and not answers) on governing the ambient. 

Many  scholars  credit  cybernetics  pioneer  Norbert  Wiener 
with the earliest expressions of computer ethics. Wiener foresaw 
an "automatic" age in which machines would have agency nearly 
equal to humans in the creation and governance of communications, which would play an ever more important role in society. 
He explained how the new computer age created gaps and ambiguities in customs and policies, and he issued clear warnings that 
profound moral choices lay ahead.13

Many long-term principles of information ethics come from 
the library sciences, which foster data stewardship, especially in 
seeking  to  keep  the  most  accurate  information  most  readily 
available: don't introduce bad data; don't lose data; don't forget 
where  data  came  from;  and  don't  restrict  access  to  data.  Data 
integrity  has  become  a  central  ethical  challenge,  made  all  the 
more difficult now that so many amateurs  across the globe are 
producing and sharing data. Thus information ethics of the early 
web era focused largely on the acts of individual users, and the 
automatic agents they released. 

Today,  however,  information  ethics  just  as  often  involves 
notions  of  commons  and  threats  of  enclosure.  For  example  in 
the  upkeep  of  commons,  and  in  contrast  to  copyright,  there 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
exists  a  notion  of  "copyduty."  In  enclosure,  culturally  shared 
names of long-existing places become property of corporations. 
Information ethics is highly participatory and the stuff of everyday Internet policy debate. Cory Doctorow, a luminary in this 
debate, has explained how the ethics of copyright have been distorted by the "agreements" you have to accept even for personal 
use  of  media  artifacts.  As  originally  conceived,  and  as  usually 
practiced, copyright was not intended that way: "The realpolitik 
of unauthorized use is that users are not required to secure permission for uses that the rights holder will never discover."14 

Among  other  gaps  in  information  ethics,  not  enough  has 
been  done  to  make  "attention  rights"  into  an  everyday  ethical 
theme. Filling this gap begins by protesting how intrusions have 
diversified. Thus, as Internet strategist Tom Hayes has observed, 
commercial interruptions were predictably part of the bargain in 
30-minute television programming, but they operate differently 
and more annoyingly in the more selective, real-time experience 
of  the  Internet.  "As  marketers  and  advertisers  hungrily  explore 
ways  to  monetize  online  attention,  they  face  mounting  challenges.  Consumers  have  migrated  online  precisely  because  they 
want more control over the media they consume. The old bargain  [from  broadcast  television]--content  for  attention--is 
broken."15  Precisely  because  so  much  more  now  occurs  out  of 
context, badly placed media cause upheaval in the economics of 
attention. Might violations of these rights be one main source for 
widespread perceptions of overload? Hayes foresees an attention 
rights movement. Among the principles in his seven-point manifesto:  "I  am  the  sole  owner  of  my  attention;"  .  .  .    "I  own  my 
click stream  and  all other  representations  of  my attention;".  . . 
"Attention theft is a crime."16

  *   2   9   ( 5  1   ,   1 *     7   +   (      $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      |        
Much  as  a  citizen  has  a  right  to  be  heard,  and  not  to  be 
silenced or drowned out by more powerful players, so also a citizen has a right to attend, and just as importantly to choose not 
to. This suggests a right of ownership of attention. A society has 
a duty to prevent thefts of that. Normally, this begins in civility. 
Respecting the mental life of others, especially amid the conduct 
of civic life, civility upholds the right to reflect. Wherever speech 
is a right, civility moderates how that right is exercised. Wherever self-interest prevails, civility needs careful upkeep, especially 
in this age of disembodied media. Legal scholar and novelist Stephen Carter has characterized  civility as "the  sum of the many 
sacrifices  we  are  called  [upon]  to  make  for  the  sake  of  living 
together."17 Community life requires often placing the common 
good above immediate self-interest, even when associating with 
strangers. Technology sometimes undermines this principle. For 
example,  as Carter  has  emphasized,  the automobile  has eroded 
the  need  to  get  along  together:  going  everywhere  alone  in  a 
cocoon of comfort has created a sense that convenience is everything, and that other people are mostly in the way.18  Likewise, 
perpetual messages supplant going to see someone, and scripted 
experiences, such as at the retail point of sale, studiously suppress 
spontaneous conversation.19

The  civility  of  individual  information  acts  shapes  and  is 
shaped  by  their  informational  environments,  whether  technological, societal, institutional, or biological. Information ethicists 
increasingly  put  these  environments  first.20  Environments  have 
intrinsic value. The very existence of cultural artifacts has value, 
and  the  environments  where  these  are  aggregated  deserve 
stewardship. 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

As in a general ethics, information ethics attributes value to 
the  very  being  of  something,  extending  this  value  to  cultural 
productions such as works of art and even to personal data sharing. It assigns a moral value to the preservation and protection of 
informational entities. Thus it is not just for the subject or agent 
who obtains, reads, copies, or sends information, but also for the 
information entities themselves. As explained by epistemologist 
Luciano Floridi, from whom the above summary is paraphrased, 
information  ethics  applies  both  to  individual  resources  and 
entire systems, to protect them from what he calls "entropy."21 
Moreover, it assigns moral agency to the organizations, artifices, 
and distributed actions that operate over networks. This makes 
it  a  vital  component  of  a  general  ethics  of  twenty-first-century 
life. All operators on information must understand and preserve 
their environments. Key to Floridi's view of informational ethics, 
this  responsibility  extends  from  micro  to  macro  scales--from 
individual  acts  of  obtaining  or  disseminating  information  to 
what  Floridi  has  called  the  "infosphere."  This  makes  information environmental.

 1 H W Z R U N H G  & R P P R Q V
Like attention, everyone knows what a commons is--or so they 
think--yet  misconceptions  abound.  First  off,  nostalgia  enters 
the picture. To Anglo-Americans, for instance, a commons was 
a  simpler  community  arrangement  disrupted  by  industrialization; in preindustrial England, it was a meadow for grazing livestock;  in  early  New  England  towns,  it  became  a  place  to 
assemble  for  democratic  process.  Today,  in  its  widespread 
misuse  in  naming  suburban  condo  subdivisions,  the  word  carries  nostalgia  for  such  origins.  Even  in  its  more  thoughtful 

  *   2   9   ( 5  1   ,   1 *     7   +   (      $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      |        
senses, as for data sharing or communities of practice, the word 
commons gets dismissed as romanticism. For as everyone knows, 
the tragedy of the commons is that, through pursuit of enlightened self-interest, individuals collectively exceed the total carrying capacity of  the commons and  deplete  its resources. Worse, 
any  mention  of  "commons"  in  a  capitalist  society,  where  the 
market  is  expected  to  solve  all  problems,  might  easily  be  dismissed as nai"ve socialism. 

Fortunately, the rise of a more networked age has established 
that  commons  are  not  socialist  regimes,  nor  indeed  states  or 
markets  at  all,  but  are  instead  necessary  complements  to  both 
states and markets.  Perhaps no better explanation of this exists 
than the recent contribution by Lewis Hyde, Common as Air. By 
now, most scholars know that the oft-cited tragedy of the commons  doesn't  describe  a  commons  at  all.  Indeed,  "Garrett 
Hardin  has  indicated  that  his  original  essay  should  have  been 
titled  `Tragedy  of  the  Unmanaged  Commons,'"  Hyde's  work 
explains, "though better still might be `The Tragedy of Unmanaged,  Laissez-Faire, Common-Pool  Resources with Easy Access 
for  Noncommunicating  Self-Interested  Individuals.'"22  This 
encapsulates  more  recent  thinking  that  a  commons  is  not  an 
open rivalry for resources so much as a set of upkeep measures 
among a managed network of participants seeking both individual and joint benefits. Common as Air enumerates many sets of 
management  measures,  past  and  present,  with  emphasis  on 
stints, that is, frugal allotments. As a verb, to stint is to use less 
than you might, "only enough, with as good left for others."23 As 
a  noun,  a  stint  is  a  voluntary  restraint--something  societies  in 
decline  generally  lack.  For  example,  traditional  markets  had 
stints,  such  as  first  access  for  locals,  access  only  on  designated 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
days,  and  so  on.  Indeed  each  sphere  of  life  had  its  own  stints, 
often against the others. To govern all aspects of life on the principles of any one sphere (whether market, church, or state) was 
an  invitation  to  tyranny.24  Today  of  course  the  tyrant  is  the 
market  itself;  and  what  this  tyrant  forcibly  (through  lawsuits) 
seeks to obtain is ownership of knowledge, even of attention.

Thus  a  commons  exists  as  rights  of  action,  and  in  the  networked practices that stint them. This helps resolve small conflicts 
over  uses  before  they  became  large  and  contentious.  Acceptable 
boundaries,  ways  of  monitoring,  and  scales  of  penalties  are  all 
negotiable.  Whether  explicitly  encoded,  implicitly  practical,  or 
both, such a governance enacts an ethics of situated information. 
It arises from patterns of use, often in what today are called microtransactions. For it is a fundamental fact that information technology improves many such patterns, and that these social patterns, 
and not just the resource they manage, are the commons. The late 
Nobel laureate Elinor Ostrom may have been the first to summarize these principles for an age of networked, resource-managing 
organizations. Most notably, from Ostrom's summary list: "Rules 
in  use  are  well  matched  to  needs  and  customs;  .  .  .  Individuals 
affected by these rules can usually participate in modifying these 
rules; . . . A system for self-governing members' behavior has been 
established; . . . Community members have access to low cost conflict resolution mechanisms."25

"Neither  the  market  nor  the  state,"  Ostrom's  oft-cited 
slogan,  helps  explain  how  networked  organizations  compensate 
for the oversights and shortcomings of those more distant spheres. 
To activist entrepreneur Paul Hawken, networked organizations 
are  nothing  less  than  the  human  component  of  a  planetary 
immune system. To Hawken, the members of these organizations 

  *   2   9   ( 5  1   ,   1 *     7   +   (      $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      |        
"were typically working on the most salient issues of our day.!.!.!. 
They  came  from  nonprofit  and  nongovernmental  world,  also 
known as civil society.!.!.!. I initially estimated over 100,000 organizations working on ecological sustainability and social justice. I 
now believe there are more than a million."26

Wherever arrangements arise to complement what markets 
can and cannot value--especially to manage upkeep, access, and 
experience of resources by means of networked noncommercial 
transactions--there  the  idea  of  a  commons  takes  new  form. 
Today,  there  are  many  kinds  of  commons  (figure  11.3).  "The 
language  of  the  commons,"  activist  David  Bollier  has  asserted, 
"serves  a  valuable  purpose.  It  provides  a  coherent  model  for 
bringing  economic,  social,  and  ethical  concerns  into  greater 
alignment."27  These  concerns  exist  because  some  resources  are 
inalienable, such as attention. Otherwise, markets tend to diminish regard for anything that cannot be bought and sold.

Many more organizations have come to recognize that treating  the  drawdown  of  human,  cultural,  or  natural  capital  as 
income  constitutes  a  serious  problem,  and  have  used  information networks to uphold the intrinsic, and sometimes also highly 
instrumental, value of these resources. The Internet became such 
an  environment  in  the  1990s,  amid  the  explosive  rise  of  the 
World  Wide  Web.  As  Ostrom  and  coauthor  Charlotte  Hess 
later reflected: 

The "information commons" movement emerged with striking suddenness. Before 1995, few thinkers saw the connection. It was around that time that we began to see new usage 
of  the  concept  "commons."  There  appears  to  have  been  a 
spontaneous  explosion  of  "ah  ha"  moments  when  multiple 
users on the internet sat up, probably in frustration, and said, 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

"Hey!  This  is  a  shared  resource!"  People  started  to  notice 
behaviors  and  conditions  on  the  web--congestion,  free 
riding,  conflict,  overuse,  and  "pollution"--that  had  long 
been identified with other types of commons.28

Like so much else at the time, this particular notion of commons was conflated with cyberspace, virtual reality, community 
networks, and digital civics. This was before talk of Web 2.0 or 
the rise of social software, especially for resource sharing. It concerned technological prospects for what was then a young discipline  of  information  architecture--not  naive  notions  of 
immersive visual data navigation as in the novels popular at the 
time, but ambitious agendas in ontology, findability, and other 
such  forms  of  server-side  stewardship  that  computer  scientiststurned-service-designers thought about. (They still do, but with 
less venture capital being thrown at them.) This early phase of 
information commons anticipated something other than today's 
corporate creed of the Cloud, or today's nonmarket realities of 
social  production.  From  an  age  before  broadband,  it  was  less 
about traffic, and more about stewardship. After all, the Internet 
began among researchers who used it partly as a data commons. 
This raises two obvious questions: Are the peer-reviewed papers 
of an academic society a knowledge commons? Are the petabytes 
of data streaming around universities a commons?

In  many  ways,  the  event  that  coalesced  the  idea  was  the 
foundation of Creative Commons in 2001, which made it clear 
that an information commons was not cyberspace writ large, but 
an intellectual property regime. This was surely an act of recognition:  clearly  the  web  was  a  cornucopia  resource,  that  is,  one 
where  each  user  increased  rather  than  depleted  the  resources 
shared.  For,  as  any  YouTube  contributor  now  knows,  much 

  *   2   9   ( 5  1   ,   1 *     7   +   (      $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      |        
scarcity is purely artificial. The net was more a "comedy of the 
commons."29 Here more use made the resource better, and copyduty was to share and share alike.

Instead,  ten  years  later,  copyright  law  has  become  a  main 
battleground of Internet policy. "If democratic practice (not to 
mention creativity) depends on plural speech and plural listening,"  lamented  Hyde,  "we  should  be  reluctant  to  give  any 
modern form of Negative Voice [similar to a king's censorship 
or veto] a presence in the public sphere. But of course we have."30 
For instance, there appear to be too few stints on media companies searching private hard disks for even the smallest copyright 
offenses,  and  then  threatening  to  deny  access,  simply  on  the 
grounds  of  accusation,  for  what  by  now  is  a  common  carrier 

       Kinds of commons.
        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
necessity  of  Internet  service.  (As  America's  ill-conceived  Stop 
Online Piracy Act would have done, had it passed in 2011.) The 
absurd extent of unstinted privatization can be seen in physical 
space as well. Thus, in one review of a pop art exhibit in London's  National  Portrait  Gallery,  with work  of  original  mashup 
appropriation  artists  such  as  Andy  Warhol  on  display,  Cory 
Doctorow  found  that  he  was  not  even  allowed  to  photograph 
the "No Photography" sign. "If true, presumably the same rules 
would  prevent  anyone  from  taking  any  pictures  in  any  public 
place--unless  you  could  somehow  contrive  to  get  a  shot  of 
Leicester  Square  without  any  writing,  logos,  architectural 
facades, or images in it. Otherwise, I doubt even Warhol could 
have gotten away with it."31

In other words, early conceptions of information technology 
as  a  cornucopia  commons  arose  before  widespread  recognition 
of  how  networks help turn  ideas into commodities.  The problem had been recognized as early as the rise of the personal computer. In 1983, Ivan Illich cautioned that "computers are doing 
to  communication  what  fences  did  to  pastures  and  cars did  to 
streets."32 By the dawn of the new millennium, as corporations 
ever  more  aggressively  privatized  knowledge  and  cultural  identity,  this  effect  became  known  as  the  "second  enclosure  movement."  According  to  James  Boyle,  who  is  credited  with  that 
expression, "once again, things that were formerly thought of as 
either common property or uncommodifiable are being covered 
with  new,  or  newly  extended,  property  rights."33  Genetics 
research provides  the most  salient examples, but  enclosure also 
happens  in  everyday  life:  the  naming  of  ballparks,  the  appearance  of  particular  retail  districts,  traditional  stories  made  into 
Hollywood movies, and even some words. According to Hyde, 

  *   2   9   ( 5  1   ,   1 *     7   +   (      $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      |        
in mass consumer culture, "the young are taught a language that 
is not theirs to own."34 There must be a right for a community 
to own its speech. There should be ways to know without being 
instructed.  There  should  be  rights  to  conversations  without 
covert surveillance, to hold third grade class without commercial 
messages, to assemble in the park with no declared purpose, to 
use cash as legal tender, and to see the night sky.

 7 D Q J L E O H  , Q I R U P D W L R Q  & R P P R Q V
What  would  make  a  good  set  of  cultural  stints  at  street  level 
(figure  11.4)?  The  noise,  light,  and  signage  ordinances  noted 
above only begin to address the challenge presented by embodied media. Thus they say nothing about whether walking past a 
store  might  cause  a  popup  ad  on  your  phone,  or  whether  it 
would be wrong for that ad to occur in audio, either as an interruption  to  a  stream  on  a  device,  or  as  a  targeted  beam  in  the 
space of the sidewalk. Signage law has few restrictions on how a 
physical site might search your phone for history data, like websites  do with cookies  on your  hard disk, so as  to decide  which 
content  to  display  on  an  outdoor  screen  as  you  walk  by.  But 
then unlike a message on your laptop or smartphone, not only 
you but also incidental bystanders would see an embodied media 
message.

In the design and governance of shared built space, information  ethics  can  improve  environmental  experience.  By  giving 
intrinsic information its chance and by forming digital information into more appropriate textures and resolutions, design practices make some spaces more usable, while also letting the world 
speak  for  itself.  Although  some  people  surround  themselves  in 
an  ever  greater array  of  media,  and  others  simply  seek  ways  to 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
       Seven stints for an ambient commons.

  *   2   9   ( 5  1   ,   1 *     7   +   (      $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      |        
unplug,  all  seem  to  manage  their  attention  in  some  new  way. 
Some of these choices involve personal will and discipline. Other 
choices involve law and civility. But together, these choices lead 
the  way  out  of  a  growing  sense  of  overload  to  more  reflective 
lives  amid  more  richly  layered  latent  possibilities for  attention. 
In other words, there may somehow emerge some prospect for 
governing the ambient.

The considered life requires a balance between messages and 
things, between mediated and unmediated experience. Citizens 
have  a  right  to  engage  one  another  and  the  built  world  they 
inhabit  in  ways  that  are  unmediated,  uninstructed,  unscripted, 
and undocumented. Under an ethics of preserving and protecting  existing  information  environments,  there  should  also  be  a 
right to preserve the subtle high resolution of the intrinsic structure  of  the  local  world,  to  protect  it  from  being  covered  over 
with the crude low resolution of one-size-fits-all media productions. Does having more ambient information make you notice 
the  world  more,  or  less?  Can  mediation  help  you  tune  in  to 
where you are? Or does it just lower the resolution of life?

Today,  ambient  information  media  become  more  difficult 
to  escape.  They  channel  more  kinds  of  communications  into 
shared physical contexts that, like city parks, come with expectations of being commons. They also take on aspects of commons 
as they make the city more usable. So far the ambient commons 
is  just  an  idea,  and  hardly  a  usual  one.  Yet  in  its  potential  for 
becoming a commons, the ambient is a very rich cultural challenge, and no simple meadow. 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6

         * 2 9 ( 5 1 , 1 *  7 + (  $ 0 % , ( 1 7
   0 D L Q  L G H D     * R Y H U Q L Q J  D P E L H Q W  L Q I R U P D W L R Q   D V  L I  L W  Z H U H  D  
     F R P P R Q V

   & R X Q W H U D U J X P H Q W     7 K H U H  L V  Q R  F R P P R Q V
   . H \  W H U P V     1 R Q F K H P L F D O  S R O O X W L R Q   V H F R Q G  H Q F O R V X U H  P R Y H P H Q W
   : K D W  K D V  F K D Q J H G     8 E L T X L W R X V  P H G L D  L Q  V K D U H G  V S D F H V
   & D W D O \ V W     7 K U H D W V  W R  F X O W X U D O  F R P P R Q V
   5 H O D W H G  I L H O G     , Q I R U P D W L R Q  H W K L F V
   2 S H Q  G H E D W H     , V  L Q I R U P D W L R Q  H Q Y L U R Q P H Q W D O L V P  H Y H Q  S R V V L E O H "

 

  
 3 H D N  ' L V W U D F W L R Q

Overload  and  distraction  have  always  existed.  The  question  is 
whether  they  have  become  more  ubiquitous  and  subtle.  The 
natural  workings  of  attention  do  seem  less  well  adapted  for  a 
world  full  of  superabundant,  artificial,  often  cognitively  engineered  stimulus.  These  conditions  suggest  a  new  stage  in  the 
history  of  information,  one  quite  different  than  even  ten  years 
ago, much less centuries past.

Under  these  changing  circumstances,  your  attention  practices may feel stressed in new ways. They may require some new 
kinds  of  mental  health  breaks.  Just  filter  better,  the  sages  tell 
you, and use the latest technologies to do so.1 But you may sense 
a limit to what you can filter, especially in physical space, and a 
steady encroachment of  potential distractions there. The audio 
volume at the grocery store is set slightly higher than last year. 
Advertisers have found yet more places to insert their messages. 
Everywhere  there  are  ever  more  public  safety  measures.  (How 
did  anyone  survive  all  those  years  without  them?)  Altogether 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
there are many more autonomous annoyances--both online and 
at street level.

Today's increasingly ambient information practices demand 
a different kind of sensibility to surroundings. Henceforth, may 
you  seek,  inhabit,  and  maintain  surroundings  that  are  less 
thoughtlessly layered in media, and more discriminately curated 
for use. There, as quiet fascination becomes more of a habit, may 
a virtuous circle arise (figure 12.1). In what may well internally 
be a process of neuroplasticity, may new fascinations and sensibilities make you less distractible in the first place, or somehow 
less prone to overconsumption. Whatever the benefits of leading 
a well-focused life,2 as countless productivity and spiritual purpose  guides  would  gladly  help  you  do,  there  also  benefits  in 
dwelling  well,  through  good  design,  and  in  taking  notice  of 
where you are. It is for broadening that particular circle of sensibilities that this inquiry has occurred. 

In hindsight, from the perspective gained by this shift of sensibilities, it might be possible to recognize "peak distraction."3 It 
should be possible to look back in wonder at just how indiscriminate  ambient  information  practices  had  been.  For  example, 
today's historical perspective makes mid-twentieth-century obsession with cars seem indiscriminate. Why did they try to do everything in cars? What was it like to live with so little walking? Who 
let  them  reshape  the  built  world  just  to  keep  the  cars  moving? 
Couldn't they foresee any of the eventual costs? 

Hindsight might reveal beliefs that ubiquitous feeds had no 
cost.  People  assumed  having  more  messages  would  always  cause 
more  belonging.  They  tolerated  in-your-face  media,  assumed 
needs for perpetual entertainment, lazily consumed whatever was 
playing, and generally tuned out of shared space. But then, one by 

  3   ( $  .      '   ,   6   7   5 $  &  7   ,   2   1      |        
one, and town by town, they began to exclaim "Enough!" As they 
proceeded to alter (but not eliminate) so many ambient information practices, distraction peaked, at least for some of them.

To declare peak distraction is not just to take more mental 
health breaks. It is not a wish to go back to some earlier way of 
life, nor just to tune out further from the present one. It must 
include  some  participatory  new  sensibility  to  surroundings.  If 
enough people seek this in the spaces they share, there may yet 
be an ambient commons. 

 6 \ Q R S V L V  D Q G  5 H W U R V S H F W
This has been an inquiry and not a scientific proof, nor a journalistic  exposition.  It  has  employed  a  superabundant  range  of 
source  materials,  with  the  advantage  of  university  research 

       Virtuous circle: cumulative adaption (neuroplasticity) from noticing surroundings too.

Sensibilities
Foraging Presence

FascinationEntertainment
Communications(high stimulus) Surroundings(high resolution)

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
library tools and databases. It has taken a longer time perspective 
than technologists usually care to do. It has assumed continuing 
need for  long-form arguments  and  secondary research. Thus  it 
has done some of what a scientist, historian, journalist, designer, 
or  blogger  might  do,  and  with  an  aim  to  consolidate  and  not 
just aggregate, as if the aim is a longer but easier trail through so 
many ideas. 

One more disclaimer: this solitary inquiry has not dwelt on 
social  media,  which  are  changing  all  too  quickly,  and  whose 
instant short format seems quite the opposite of print. It admits 
how,  to  ever  more  people,  the  social  network  has  become  the 
locus  of knowledge,  or even being; and  that to many  of  them, 
the idea of wanting to be alone with one's thoughts might seem 
baffling. This inquiry accepts how that might be true for accomplished researchers and not just teen social life. More ambitious 
social (and academic) networks do gather, broker, maintain, and 
debate  knowledge  in  ways  that  a  solitary  scholar  (or  reader) 
could  never  do.  This  all  seems  quite  Jamesian:  knowledge 
becomes  more  dynamic,  approximate,  statistical,  and  provisional. In this sense, the Internet shakes the university to its core; 
the two are now breeding a new heir. What all this does for individual knowledge  and attention will  take the best philosophers 
of the day (both solitary and networked) to investigate.

To summarize the present argument for an environmental history  of  information  as  presented  in  previous  chapters.  New 
media have been creating a middle ground for "urban markup." 
Neither official signposting nor criminal graffiti nor business as 
usual in advertising, urban markup invites new curation, civility, 
and restraint--but by whom? 

  3   ( $  .      '   ,   6   7   5 $  &  7   ,   2   1      |        
An explosion of contexts and formats for situated images--
screens everywhere--has been altering visual experience, at least 
at street level. There are so many screens everywhere that there is 
little  impulse  to  look  at  any  one  of  them,  much  less  through 
them, as if apertures onto someplace else. Instead the experience 
becomes  postcinematic,  often  architectural,  and  increasingly 
about reading the built environment.4

A more truly ambient experience of built form comes from 
the engineering  of atmospheric  comfort. As energy imperatives 
and smart green building technologies combine to move architecture beyond the sealed glass box, atmosphere ceases to be so 
uniform,  and  embodied  cognition  suggests  new  relations  of 
commodity, firmness, and delight.

The  experience  of  the  city  seems  even  more  enmeshed  in 
digital media practices on a still larger scale, especially wherever 
the  smartphone  has  become  the  main  way  of  getting  on  with 
business. Sensemaking unfolds not only on the scale of a single 
work group or specialized site, where habitual actions lead into a 
belated  understanding  of  a  situation,  but  also  on  the  scale  of 
daily life across the metropolis. 

Even the simplest look at environmental history suggests the 
importance  of  recognizing  the  stages  in  the  relations  of  nature 
and artifice. Different people, disciplines, or cultures sometimes 
coincidentally  identify  some  new  overarching  phenomenon, 
such as pollution. Histories of lighting and signage have a place 
in  this,  as  do  broadcast  media,  although  the  rise  of  situated 
information  technology  raises  major  new  themes.  But  is  information environmentalism even possible, much less desirable? 

The Internet has plenty of commons advocacy, yet is mostly 
libertarian (as well it should be). The idea of a commons plays 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
differently for information cornucopias than it does for depletable, pooled physical resources. But which of these governs the 
accumulation  of  situated  media  at  street  level?  This  suggests  a 
tangible  information  commons,  or  at  least  new  practices  in 
information ethics.

To understand such turns in the environmental history of information, it helps to know more about the workings of attention. 5 
For likewise there have been dramatic shifts in the discipline of 
cognitive  science.  Context  and  embodiment  now  appear  to 
count for much more than was believed a generation ago, when 
many of the foundational principles of digital media and computer-like models of mind were first established. New stages in 
the  histories  of  environment  and  information  demand  new 
insights  into  attention.  The  principles  of  embodied  cognition 
that  have  been  explored  here  as  the  workings  of  attention  do 
suggest how persistent and inhabitable phenomena should mean 
more than they have, both individually and culturally. 

The cognitive role of architecture is to serve as banks for the 
rivers of data and communications, to create sites, objects, and 
physical  resource  interfaces  for  those  electronic  flows  to  be 
about. At the same time, architecture provides habitual and specialized  contexts  by  which  to  make  sense  of  activities.  And, 
where possible, architecture furnishes rich, persistent, attentionrestoring detail in which to take occasional refuge from the rivers 
of data.

In the meeting of architecture and interface, attention and 
situated  technology,  or  cognition  and  environment,  embodiment  has  long been a  unifying  theme. By working  within that 

  3   ( $  .      '   ,   6   7   5 $  &  7   ,   2   1      |        
intellectual  tradition,  perhaps  this  inquiry  has  shed  useful  new 
light  on  the  nature  of  attention  to  surroundings.  That  seems 
largely a matter of habits and practices. Although natural limits 
exist,  as  to  multitasking,  attention  practices  are  adaptable  in 
powerful ways that are better understood than they were even a 
decade ago. Neuroplasticity exists, makes use of embodied cognition,  and  is  worth  knowing  and  debating  more  often.  The 
brain is neither fixed for life, nor freely malleable into just anything,  but  instead  is  patterned,  emergent,  and  recombinant.  It 
acquires pathways, especially from habit, especially with context, 
and tends to use elements of those for other incidental purposes 
along the way.

You  have  seen  how  it  helps  to  discern  different  kinds  of 
information itself. Instead of the old technocentric definition of 
information as sent symbols, it helps to take the epistemologists' 
definition as "true semantic content." It also helps to qualify the 
latter in two further ways. First, content may be something you 
do and not something sent to you. Second, not all information is 
semantic; you may also be informed by the intrinsic structure of 
things.

As a noun, ambient conflates many such considerations into 
a word sticky enough to represent a new sensibility. No longer 
just a luxury, the ambient has become subject matter for creative 
work  by  anyone  who  occupies  or  augments  shared  physical 
spaces. In an age of superabundance, it is important to tune the 
balance  (as  the  philosopher  Albert  Borgmann  so  well  put  it) 
among information about, for, and as the world. In a world after 
peak  distraction,  the  design,  curation,  and  experience  of  the 
ambient all begin to improve. 

        |        $   0   %   ,   (   1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1   6
 6 H Q V L E L O L W \   L Q  W K H  ( Q G
Any survival guide to the twenty-first century includes instructions for the educated person on what to do in the event of data 
smog, hive minds, engineered distractions, attention theft, compulsive  connectivity,  coercive  connectivity,  and  the  like.  Many 
of these instructions involve a casual fascination with context--
habits of awareness that work almost anywhere, enough so that 
you  can  be  perfectly  content  sitting  stuck  in  traffic  without 
music playing, and without messages to check.

On  the  whole,  well-being  involves  attentional  balance.  It 
takes continual reeducation of the brain. Sensibility means cultivated attentional preferences. It means a refined receptivity, such 
as  a  musician's  ear,  an  athlete's  sense of  position,  or  a  tonguetied  traveler's  eye  for  body  language.  It  also  means  a  more 
engaged  disposition  than  tuning  out.  To  cultivate  the  selective 
sensitivities  now  necessary in  an age  of  embodied  information, 
you need to take notice of more, not less. The blase' detachment 
that  may  have  worked  best  against  industrial  and  broadcast 
events now just leads to much more solipsistic overload. Instead, 
your better defense is in the details of everyday life. As with food, 
so with information, it helps to value the slow and the local.

In the end, this is an argument for good design. Design sensibilities  must  become  much  more  widely  appreciated  for  how 
they  configure  larger  attentional  sensibilities.  Now  comes  the 
time  to  reconfigure  many  built  contexts  for  less  waste  on  a 
changing  planet.  Information  superabundance  stands  to  be  a 
major factor in that. Better design sensibilities toward ever more 
situated technologies  now  seem vital.  But, for a  start,  just take 
stock  of  attention.  Take  back  your  attention,  again  and  again, 

  3   ( $  .      '   ,   6   7   5 $  &  7   ,   2   1      |        
give  more  and  more  of  it  to  your  surroundings,  and  help  take 
care how those now seem to be filling with new media.

In an age of distraction engineering, you have no choice but 
to  manage  your  attention  more  mindfully.  To  do  so  requires 
more  knowledge  of  how  the  brain  works,  but  also  of  how  the 
built  world  works.  So  when  choosing  the  focused  life,  don't 
forget  to  choose where. This  isn't just  about stopping  to smell 
the roses, although that sometimes helps. A new mindfulness to 
context becomes no mere luxury when the world becomes augmented, and the ambient takes form.

         3 ( $ .  ' , 6 7 5 $ & 7 , 2 1
   0 D L Q  L G H D     3 H U V R Q D O  V H Q V L E L O L W \  L Q F O X G H V  V X U U R X Q G L Q J V
   & R X Q W H U D U J X P H Q W     $ Q \ R Q H  F D Q  D O U H D G \  I L O W H U  K R Z H Y H U  W K H \  S O H D V H
   . H \  W H U P V     3 H D N  G L V W U D F W L R Q
   : K D W  K D V  F K D Q J H G     0 L Q G I X O Q H V V  D E R X W  R Y H U F R Q V X P S W L R Q
   & D W D O \ V W     1 H X U R S O D V W L F L W \
   5 H O D W H G  I L H O G     $ Q \  U H I O H F W L Y H  S U D F W L F H
   2 S H Q  G H E D W H     + R Z  P X F K  F D Q  D Q \ R Q H  I L O W H U "

 

 ( S L O R J X H   6 L O H Q W  & R P P R Q V

Monastic silence: instructions for tourists at the high Benedictine abbey of Fleury, France.

        |        (   3   ,   /   2   *   8 (
You  should  have  the  right  for  your  environment  to  remain 
silent. Without that silence, you may get fewer chances to speak 
your  mind, to  hear  yourself think,  to  find empathy  for  others, 
and  somehow  just  to  be.  "Silence,  according  to  western  and 
eastern  tradition  alike,  is  necessary  for  the  emergence  of  persons,"  Ivan  Illich  once  cautioned.  In  a  1983  speech  called 
"Silence  Is  a  Commons,"  Illich  offered  a  parable  on  the 
encroachment  of  media.  This  was  long  before  mobile  phones, 
sensor fields, or media facades:

On the same boat on which I arrived in 1926 [to the Dalmatian  coast,  as  a  newborn],  the  first  loudspeaker  was 
landed  on  the  island.  Few  people  there  had  ever  heard  of 
such  a  thing.  Up  to  that  day,  all  men  and  women  had 
spoken  with  more  or  less  equally  powerful  voices.  Henceforth  this  would  change.  Henceforth  the  access  to  the 
microphone would  determine  whose voice shall  be magnified. Silence now ceased to be in the commons; it became a 
resource  for  which  loudspeakers  compete.  Language  itself 
was  transformed  thereby  from  a  local  commons  into  a 
national  resource  for  communication.  As  enclosure  by  the 
lords  increased  national  productivity  by  denying  the  individual  peasant  [the  right]  to  keep  a  few  sheep,  so  the 
encroachment of the loudspeaker has destroyed that silence 
which  so  far  had  given  each  man  and  woman  his  or  her 
proper  and  equal  voice.  Unless  you  have  access  to  a  loudspeaker, you now are silenced.1

The  loudspeaker  had  violated  some  tacit  expectations.  In 
reference  to  the  traditional  cultures  of  Japan,  where  he  was 
speaking, Illich observed:

  6   ,   / (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1 6     |        
People called commons those parts of the environment for 
which customary law exacted specific forms of community 
respect.  People  called  commons  that  part  of  the  environment which lay beyond their own thresholds and outside of 
their  own  possessions,  to  which,  however,  they  had  recognized  claims  of  usage,  not  to  produce  commodities  but  to 
provide for the subsistence of their households. The customary law which  humanized the environment by establishing 
the commons was usually unwritten.2

Silence  remains in  such  trust.  Silence  is  not  the  totality of 
having  been  silenced,  but  the  ambient  reflectivity  from  which 
anyone may speak. Silence remains necessary for individual and 
especially cultural sanity. This is why modern cities enforce noise 
ordinances. You have a right to free speech, but not to amplify it 
from the rooftops all night, as if the air were an inconsequential 
void.  Many  cities,  such  as  Chicago,  will  now  impound  "boom 
cars," whose hood-mounted speakers thump too loudly.

Of course, the boisterous diversity of sounds is the very stuff 
of city life. To move about is to make some kind of noise. Life 
seeks the clamor of the marketplace, the exuberance of festivals, 
the roar of the crowd at the game. In many walks of life, to sit 
silent is complicity, submission, or alienation. It is literally to be 
dumb. Yet little is more dumbfounding than to lose control of 
your attention.  Wherever advertising, entertainment, newscasting, or total public safety instruction dominates all communication,  there  the  art  of  conversation  languishes.  There  the  ears 
might  shut  down.  Perhaps  texting  has  become  so  popular 
because it requires no listening.

        |        (   3   ,   /   2   *   8 (

In the millennial year 2000, British novelist Sara Maitland 
chucked it  all and moved  out onto the moors, where she  soon 
"fell in love with the silence." In 2008, she published A Book of 
Silence as a chronicle of her attention restoration. "All silence is 
just waiting to be broken!" a close friend had chided her at the 
outset. "Silence is not for everyone," Maitland replied. Although 
almost  everyone  claims  to  want  a  little  peace  and  quiet,  most 
avoid prolonged silence, as if it were "dangerous to our mental 
health,  a  threat  to  our  civil  liberties."3  If  some  find  palpable 
silence just as  oppressive as excessive  noise, perhaps they do so 
from a very different set of beliefs.

First, some instinct rightly exists for the inherent boisterousness  of  life;  people  want  to hear  one  another living.  Second, at 
some  acquired  cultural  level,  people  rightly  fear  oppressive 
authorities and institutions, as if silence means subjugation. This 
seems  so  whether  one  is  silenced  by  force,  as  with  Nazi  loudspeakers, or by one's own submission, as in monastic self-abnegation. Indulgent noise dispels such threatening associations. Third, 
today's  social  technologies  make  the  silence  of  solitude  suspect. 
Although perhaps any tribal village culture would likewise have 
taboos  against  silent  loners,  today's  social  media  reify  that  bias, 
and make communication unprecedentedly frequent. Quiet time 
barely  exists;  indeed  the  word  time  increasingly  implies  a  point 
and less often an interval. Fourth, although Maitland didn't dwell 
on this, perhaps some people would just as soon not be left alone 
with their thoughts, as these days those tend toward doom and 
gloom. As a result, most people "choose to have incessant sound 
pumping  into  their  environment,"4  as  Maitland  put  it.  Still,  it 
wasn't the tunes from the ceilings that led her to plot her escape, 
but an "encounter with positive silence."5

  6   ,   / (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1 6     |        
Like the air on which it is borne, silence is not just an absence. 
As  a  presence,  it  has  always  attracted  the  life  divine.  The  mere 
seeking of this presence, whether as an unsullied planetary Nature, 
a personified God, an unnamable immanence, or just the sound of 
your heart and your nerves, admits that something is missing in a 
world of endless stimulation. To the acclaimed Estonian composer 
Arvo Pa"rt, silence was a single note: "I am alone with Silence. I 
have discovered that it is enough when a single note is beautifully 
played.  Silence  comforts  me."6  To  practice  such  presence  is  to 
uphold  how  you  can  become  informed  without  transmissions, 
codes, or things. In an often-told anecdote about Mother Teresa, 
her  followers  wanted  to  know  what  she  asked  God  in  prayer. 
"Nothing, I just listen," she replied. "And what does He tell you?" 
they inquired. "Nothing, He just listens."7

The  musician  John  Cage,  who  was  no  saint,  offered  what 
would become his most famous work, "4'33"," four minutes and 
thirty-three seconds during which the performer was to sit at a 
piano in silence. As the mathematician Douglas Hofstadter once 
observed, there is many a pub where you might wish that "4'33"" 
were on the jukebox.8 Cage explained his desire to rethink listening. He wanted to reawaken the ear to the patterns of sound in 
the world. He took those as music--"poetry to his ears."9 This 
purposeful  acceptance  of  extraneous  sound  as  music  aptly 
reflected the increasing hubbub of twentieth-century life, where 
the experience of silence was quite rare. Here was an early recognition of attention restoration.

Total  silence  would  be  rare  in  any  case.  Writers,  most  of 
whom seek silence daily so they can hear the sentences they are 
making, sometimes write of the quest for total silence. Some such 
as  Aldous  Huxley  sought  it  by  floating  in  sensory  isolation 

        |        (   3   ,   /   2   *   8 (
chambers. Wondering if there was any silence to be had in New 
York,  novelist  George  Michelsen  Foy  eventually  looked  elsewhere: alongside monks, in the experience of astronauts, or deep 
in mines.10 But even there, your heart still beats, and depending 
on the life you have led, your ears might never stop ringing. Like 
national  security,  quiet  is  relative;  totality  is  a  misconception. 
Instead, you must seek small intervals of somewhat less noise, as 
when  stadium  crowds  pay  their  respects  with  a  "moment  of 
silence."

Silent fascination can restore attention.11 Running on effortless  perception  of  natural  data,  fascination  exercises  neural 
resources other than those fatigued by excess stimulation. Thus, 
to  recover  some  attention,  you  might  spend  a  hour  with  the 
sounds of a waterfall. There you might wave hello to young earpod-equipped hikers who plow by without breaking stride; but 
if  you  suggest  they  could  be  missing  something,  they  might 
simply  roll  their  eyes.  Maybe  they  like  soundtracks  with  their 
waterfalls.  Maybe  seeing  is  enough.  Besides,  the  woods  are 
increasingly filled with the sound of off-road vehicles. The park 
experience,  once  vaunted  as  "America's  best  idea,"12  involves 
ever more noise from vehicles driving by, flying over, and churning or splashing past. Garret Keizer, the keeper  of noisestories.
com, has compiled an impressive portrait of such annoyances in 
the book The Unwanted Noise of Everything We Want. To Keizer, 
as to almost anyone who seeks some occasional quiet outdoors, 
"recreation"  loses  something  when  motorized,  for  bystanders 
and  participants  alike.  Yet  the  heavily  equipped  "sportsman," 
atop  his  costly  off-road  rig,  quite  likely  hauled  by  a  rugged, 
eagle-emblazoned truck, may quickly dismiss any frugal, silenceseeking hikers who dare to protest as "elitist."13

  6   ,   / (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1 6     |        
Restoration  also  begins  from  stillness.  Even  in  small, 
untrained,  and  far-from-daily  sessions,  meditation  conditions 
the  ability  to  identify  and  let  go  of  thoughts,  messages,  and 
images  as  ephemeral  features  of  the  mind's  more  fundamental 
being.  Noises  may  nevertheless  penetrate.  Even  a  seasoned 
teacher still  hears a  siren go by outside on the street. But then 
that  noise  washes  away.  Much  else  soon  follows.  Desires  may 
vanish,  such  as  for  recorded  music.  It  becomes  possible  to  be 
comfortable  sitting  in  traffic  without  any  audio  in  your  car. 
Abilities may meanwhile arise, such as to tune out the autonomous annoyances of the augmented city, to tolerate nearby cell 
phone conversations, or to marvel at the exuberant expression of 
your neighbor's mechanized assault on his yard. But, most of all, 
some ability to discern among kinds of silences and noises begins 
to  take  hold.  For  instance,  a  difference  becomes  clear  between 
the  kind  of  silence  that  discourages  speech  and  the  kind  that 
offers enough quiet for conversation. Likewise, you might note a 
difference between the noise of life as it always has been and the 
noise of recent new forms of overconsumption.

Much noise does correlate with consumption, as Keizer has 
explained, and with disregard for anything that can't be bought 
and  sold.  More  precisely,  producing  noise  does  so;  whereas 
having to live with noise correlates with poverty, or worse.14 In 
the industrial age, the poor had to live by the railroad tracks; but 
the affluent  moved  to  the suburbs,  where  they could  run  their 
lawn mowers in peace and quiet. (Of course, today fewer of the 
affluent mow their own lawns; the professional crews that now 
provide  that service  employ  huge tractors,  weed whackers,  and 
squadrons  of  leaf  blowers;  any  sense  of  reflection  once  part  of 
keeping a lawn seems to have vanished.)15

        |        (   3   ,   /   2   *   8 (

So despite how unimportant it may seem in comparison to 
the major issues of these times, noise deserves more reaction. As 
Keizer has put it, there is parable of disregard for the planet in 
how so many of those who produce noise so easily dismiss whatever they are drowning out. Who needs conversation? Who cares 
about  the  fools  who  claim  to  care  about  birds?  Keizer's  main 
concern is arrogance: "In the end, after all the physicists, musicologists, and social theorists have had their say, there are only 
two kinds of human noise in the world: the noise that says, `The 
world  is  mine,'  and  the  noise  that  says,  `It's  my  world  too.'"16 
Whereas some noise necessarily and incidentally emerges as a byproduct  of  living,  working,  and  moving  about,  Keizer  hears  a 
new kind of deliberate and unnecessary  noise taking over. It is 
the kind of noise that continues long after those who started it 
have gone home.17 To protest this secondary and often subjective form of pollution might seem churlish and even elitist. But 
in  deft  response  to  these  usual  objections,  Keizer  shows  how 
mindfulness  to  noise  abatement  connects  with  awareness  of 
environment.  He  shows  how  so  much  noise  comes  from  the 
assertion of self-importance over respect for environment, apparent  not  only  in  obvious  offenses  such  as  jet  skis,  but  also  in 
everybody-does-it  acts  like  taking  a  commercial  airline  flight. 
Thus  the  cultural  shifts  now  necessary  for  survival  might  just 
begin with learning to live more quietly.18

A quieter life needn't feel sad or solitary; quite the contrary. 
It  involves  participation  ("my  world  too")  in  the  temporary 
making  of  unmediated  human  noise  by  all,  in  the  upkeep  of 
physical and cultural commons, and in the curation of the media 
that inevitably infuse the world. A quieter life takes more notice 
of the world, and uses technology more for curiosity and less for 

  6   ,   / (  1   7      &   2   0   0   2   1 6     |        
conquest.  It  finds  comfort  and  restoration  in  unmediated  perceptions. It increases the ability to discern among forms of environmentally encountered information. It values persistence and 
not  just  novelty.  It  stretches  and  extends  the  now,  beyond  the 
latest tweets, beyond the next business quarter, until the sense of 
the time period you inhabit exceeds the extent of your lifetime. 
It likewise expands the extent of where you think you live.

An  ambient  commons,  if  there  ever  were  such  a  thing, 
would be quiet enough but seldom silent. In this alone it could 
change what it means to be here now. Like a quiet evening on 
the  square,  it  might  help  recall  how  the  noisy  clamor  of  the 
morning's market was a means, and not an end in itself.

 

 1 R W H V
 3 U R O R J X H
1.  Homage is due to Howard Rheingold's wonderful but different "Shibuya Epiphany,"  in  Smart  Mobs:  The  Next  Social  Revolution  (New  York:  Basic 

Books, 2003), 1-28, and to Nelson Goodman's explanation of this otherwise seldom-used word, replete, in Languages of Art: An  Approach to a  Theory of 
Symbols, 2nd ed. (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1976), 229-235.

 & K D S W H U  
1.  News items about "glowing rectangles" proliferate after June 2009, when the  satire  magazine  Onion  published  a  fictional  piece:  "Report:  90%  of 

Waking  Hours  Spent  Staring  at  Glowing  Rectangles."  Whatever  the  actual numbers, they must be high. "Researchers were able to identify nearly 30 varieties of glowing rectangles that play some role throughout the course of each day.  Among  them:  handheld  rectangles,  music-playing  rectangles,  mobile 
communication rectangles, personal work rectangles, and bright alarm cubes, which emit a high-pitched reminder that it's time to rise from one's bed and 
move toward the rectangles in one's kitchen." http://www.theonion.com/arti-cles/report-90-of-waking-hours-spent-staring-at-glowing,2747/

2.  Mark  Prendergast,  The  Ambient  Century:  From  Mahler  to  Trance:  The Evolution of Sound in the Electronic Age, with a preface by Brian Eno (London: 
Bloomsbury Press, 2001).

        |        1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6            ²      
3.  Claude Debussy, as quoted in Prendergast, The Ambient Century, 10.
4.  Ambient Planet marketing agency website, www.ambient-planet.com, as of February 2010.

5.  Lisa Reichelt, "Ambient Intimacy," 2007, http://www.disambiguity.com/ambient-intimacy/.  "Knowing  these  details  creates  intimacy,"  Reichelt 
explains. "(It also saves a lot of time when you finally do get to catch up with these  people  in  real  life!)  It's  not  so  much  about  meaning,  it's  just  about 
being in touch."
6.  Clive  Thompson,  "I'm  So  Totally,  Digitally  Close  to  You,"  New  York Times Magazine, September 21, 2008. "Social scientists have a name for this 

sort of incessant online contact," Thompson wrote. "They call it `ambient awareness.' It is, they say, very much like being physically near someone and 
picking up on his mood through the little things he does--body language, sighs, stray comments--out of the corner of your eye."

7.  See  Hiroshi  Ishii  and  Brygg  Ullmer,  "Tangible  Bits:  Towards  Seamless Interfaces," in ACM CHI 1997, 234-241.
8.  Paul Dourish, Where the Action Is: The Foundations of Embodied Interac-tion (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001), 115. "Embodiment is the property 
of  our  engagement  with  the  world  that  allows  us  to  make  it  meaningful" (126). As well as anyone, Dourish's work has shown the way from phenomenology to ambient interface to urban informatics.
9.  Dourish,  Suchman,  Weiser,  Brown,  and  many  others  influential  to embodied information were at Xerox PARC in the mid-1990s, when I got to 

be a (helpless but observant) visitor on sabbatical there. 
10.  See  Dan  Hill,  "New  Soft  City,"  City  of  Sound,  2010,  http://www.cityofsound.com.

11.  See Gernot Bo"hme, "Atmosphere as the Fundamental Concept of a New Aesthetics," Thesis Eleven 36 (August 1993): 113-126.
12.  Thanks to my colleague Steve Jackson for "circumstantial."
13.  See Leo Spitzer, "Milieu and Ambiance: An Essay in Historical Seman-tics," Philosophy and Phenomenological  Research 3, no. 2 (December 1942): 

169-218.
14.  See Steven Berlin Johnson, The Invention of Air: A Story of Science, Faith, Revolution,  and  the  Birth  of  America  (New  York:  Riverhead  Books,  2008). 

  1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6            ²            |        
Ever a bellwether of digital culture, Johnson saw the relevance of a history of Joseph Priestly and the discovery of oxygen.
15.  Spitzer, "Milieu and Ambiance," 2.
16.  See note 13. This Spitzer essay may have been an esoteric find, but per-haps  something  from  before  the  cybernetic  age  was  just  what  the  inquiry 

needed. 
17.  Spitzer, "Milieu and Ambiance," 182, citing Pliny the Elder, Naturalis Historia, Book XIV, line 11.

18.  Whitaker's  Words,  a  Latin  dictionary,  was  used  for  this  translation. Although competing versions and translations of Pliny exist, that is no reason 
to put aside this vivid image of vines. 
 & K D S W H U  
1.  Epistemology  is  not  my  field.  I  have  read  many  overview  and  seminal texts and formed my own nai"ve viewpoints from them. That process is the 

source  of  many  apparent  generalizations  in  this  text.  Wherever  aware  of  a particular scholar behind an idea, I have made a citation. When stating my 
own  take  on  what  appears  to  be  common  wisdom  with  countless  scholars behind it, I have attempted to trace its origins wherever practical to do so.

2.  The crosswalk example came from an experience in Savannah, Georgia, where I gave a talk at the 2008 IxDA interaction design conference. Little did 
I know that Dan Saffer, the host who had just introduced me, had a cross-walk  on  the  cover  of  his  excellent  book  Designing  for  Interaction:  Creating 
Innovative  Applications  and  Devices.  (San  Francisco:  New  Riders,  2006). Tick, tick.

3.  Albert Borgmann, Holding On to Reality: The Nature of Information at the Turn of the Millennium (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999), 1.
4.  Peter Lyman and Hal R. Varian, "How Much Information 2003?" http://www2.sims.berkeley.edu/research/projects/how-much-info-2003/.
5.  "The Data Deluge: Businesses, Governments and Society Are Only Start-ing to Tap Its Vast Potential," Economist, February 25, 2010.
6.   Eric Schmidt, as quoted in M. G. Sigler, "Eric Schmidt: Every 2 Days We Create As Much Information As We Did Up to 2003," Tech Crunch, 
August 4, 2010, http://techcrunch.com/2010/08/04/schmidt-data/.

        |        1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6            ²      
7.  David  Levy,  "Information  Overload,"  in  Kenneth  Einar  Himma  and Herman T. Tavani, eds., The Handbook of Information and Computer Ethics 
(New York: Wiley, 2008), 510-512.
8.  "You Choose: If You Can Have Everything in 57 Varieties, Making Deci-sions Becomes Hard Work: The Tyranny of Choice," Economist, December 

16, 2010.
9.  On digital natives, see Don Tapscott, Growing Up Digital: The Rise of the Net Generation (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2000).

10.  Consider the two poles of mindfulness and its disappearance. Winifred Gallagher, in Rapt: Attention and the Focused Life (New York: Penguin Press, 
2009), has explained how rapt attention not only remains possible but can also be cultivated, both through reflection and through careful cultural production, and that in many cases neuroscientists can show this. At the other pole, Maggie Jackson, in Distracted: The Erosion of Attention and the Coming 
Dark Age (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2008), has confronted the myth of multitasking and the abdication of agendas to browsing, grazing, and feedburning, and, though Jackson is far from hopeful, she likewise sees possible practices to counter this. Of course, there are other approaches to unfettered 
attention, such as traditional Zen Buddhism.
11.  Jean-Baptiste  Michel,  Yuan  Kui  Shen,  Aviva  Presser  Aiden,  Adrian Veres,  Matthew  K.  Gray,  William  Brockman,  the  Google  Books  Team, 

Joseph  P.  Pickett,  Dale  Hoiberg,  Dan  Clancy,  Peter  Norvig,  Jon  Orwant, Steven Pinker, Martin A. Nowak, and Erez Lieberman Aiden, "Quantitative 
Analysis  of  Culture  Using  Millions  of  Digitized  Books,"  Sciencexpress, December  16,  2010,  http://www.librarian.net/wp-content/uploads/sciencegooglelabs.pdf.
12.  Richard  Saul  Wurman,  Information  Anxiety  (New  York:  Doubleday, 1989), 38, 211.

13.  James's original aphorism reads: "My experience is what I agree to attend to." Another reads: "Every one knows what attention is." William James, Principles of Psychology (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1890), 1:402, 403. See chapter 3 of this volume for more detailed excerpts and citations.

14.  Herbert  Simon,  "Designing  Organizations  for  an  Information-Rich World,"  in  Computers,  Communication,  and  the  Public  Interest,  ed.  Martin 
Greenberger (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1971), 40-41.

  1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6            ²            |        
15.  Erasmus,  as  quoted  in  Ann  Blair,  "Information  Overload,  the  Early Years" Boston Globe, November 28, 2010.
16.  See  Ann  Blair,  "Coping  with  Information  Overload  in  Early  Modern Europe," Journal of the History of Ideas 64 (2003): 11-28.
17.  Blair, "Information Overload, the Early Years."
18.  The argument that anyone in any era may have felt overload has to be balanced  against  the  argument  that  artificial  stimuli  for  which  cognitive 

mechanisms  have  not  evolved  are  ever  more  ubiquitous,  cognitively  engi-neered in their own ways, and habit-forming. See David Levy, "Information 
Overload," for a good place to start in on this debate.
19.  See  course  description  for  "History  of  Information,"  C103,  School  of Information, University of California Berkeley, http://www.ischool.berkeley.

edu/courses/103.
20.  David Henkin, City Reading: Written Words and Public Spaces in Ante-bellum New York (New York: Columbia University Press, 1998), 101-136.

21.  David Shenk, Data Smog: Surviving the Information Glut (San Francisco: Harper Collins, 1997), 29.
22.  See video discussion between Lev Grossman (Time) and Reihan Salam (Daily  Beast),  "Information  Obesity,"  Bloggingheads,  August  6,  2010, 
http://video.nytimes.com/video/2010/08/06/opinion/1247468584580/bloggingheads-information-obesity.html.

23.  See Geoff Nunberg, "Farewell to the Information Age," in The Future of the Book (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997). 

24.  See Michael Buckland, "Information as Thing," Journal of the American Society of Information Science 42 (1991): 351-360.
25.  Buckland, "Information as Thing," 359.
26.  Luciano Floridi, "Semantic Conceptions of Information," Stanford Ency-clopedia of Philosophy, ed. Edward N. Zalta (Winter 2007 Edition), http://

plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2007/entries/information-semantic.
27.  Floridi, "Semantic Conceptions of Information." Though never false in its  original,  natural  form  and  location,  nonsemantic  information  can,  of 

course, be faked through human agency.

        |        1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6            ²      
28.  See Paul Grice, "Meaning." Philosophical Review 66 (1957): 377-388. A standard.
29.  Luciano Floridi, Philosophy of Information, http://www.philosophyofinformation.net/blog/.
30.  This  section's  many  generalizations  stem  from  having  grown  up  on semiotics  as  a  graduate  student  and  young  faculty  member  in  schools  of 
architecture.
31.  For an exemplary work on the relationship of documentation, city form, and  patterns of  use, see Priscilla Ferguson, Paris  as  Revolution:  Writing  the 

19th Century City (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994).
32.  Anyone who took part in the academy in the 1990s might find it diffi-cult to sort out the literature on intrinsic information and sign theory from 

his or her own historical perspective and to state with any certainty which works  were  seminal.  I,  for  one,  read  Roland  Barthes  in  the  French  as  an 
undergraduate. And, for quite some time, architecture students were all made to read Jacques Derrida.

33.  Borgmann,  Holding  On  to Reality,  218. Borgmann  opens with  similar examples  of  natural  meaning:  gravel  beds  indicate  a  river, cottonwoods  its 
bank, and an osprey nest the presence of trout in the river (1). Borgmann's explanations of environmental knowing, especially through the contingency 
of built form, parallel my own thoughts and have given better voice to them. The whole point is that many of us share these same thoughts.

34.  Jose' Luis Borges, "Of Exactitude in Science," in A Universal History of Infamy (London: Penguin, 1975). The map larger than the territory long ago 
became a very findable meme online.
35.  Borgmann, Holding On to Reality, 181, also uses this common example of music. But when you tell others that what they are listening to is a recording, you get much rolling of the eyes. For them, the file is the music.
36.  Borgmann, Holding On to Reality, 221.
37.  Borgmann, Holding On to Reality, 209.
38.  Borgmann, Holding On to Reality, 22-23.
39.  Borgmann, Holding On to Reality, 1.
40.  Floridi, in "Semantic Conceptions of Information," calls "information `for' reality" "instructional information."

  1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6            ²            |        
41.  Borgmann, Holding On to Reality, 113. "Contingency is the one conces-sion thoughtful theorists like to make to the eloquence of the world" (106).
42.  Jackson, Distracted, 25-26.
43.  Bill  McKibben,  The  Age  of  Missing  Information  (New  York:  Random House, 1992).

44.  Borgmann, Holding On to Reality, 14.
45.  Given what cognitive neuroscience has learned about the importance of knowledge representations and intentional states, a new round of "environment-and-intent" studies could do much to compensate for a previous, mid-twentieth-century round of overly deterministic "environment-and-behavior" 
studies.
46."Oh . . . , cool . . . , where?": I actually got this response from someone in my own place of work.

 & K D S W H U  
1.  Attention science is not my field. This inquiry is for others who are like-wise curious. I have necessarily made generalizations from the literature, and 

do not claim to have introduced any ideas myself. My contribution is their juxtapositions with other fields here (see note 1 to chapter 2). 

2.   James, Principles of Psychology, 1:402.
3.  See Bill McKibben, foreword to Jackson, Distracted, 9-10. Cultural critic McKibben  put  it  well:  "Distraction  has  always  been  a  human  condition. 

Sages have always been quick to point out how even a few minutes of medita-tion prove the jumpy nature of our consciousness--our monkey minds. But 
now  every  force  conspires  to  magnify  that  inattentiveness:  technology  has made distraction ubiquitous" (9).

4.  "Anything humans do," even sex? See, for example, http://scitech.blogs.cnn.com/2010/05/06/texting-during-sex-some-say-its-ok/.
5.  See  Eyal  Ophir,  Clifford  Nass,  and  Anthony  D.  Wagner,  "Cognitive Control in Media Multitaskers," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106 (2009): 15583-15587.
6.  See Sherry Turkle, Alone Together: Why We Expect More from Technology and Less from Each Other (New York: Basic Books, 2011).

        |        1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6            ²      
7.  For  Linda  Stone  on  continuous  partial  attention,  see  http://lindastone.net/. An abundance of attention articles has been collected here, including 
even one on the possibility of "email apnea."
8.  Linda  Stone,  "Continuous  Partial  Attention--Not  the  Same  As  Multi-Tasking,"  Bloomberg  Businessweek  Online,  July  24,  2008,  http://www.

businessweek.com/business_at_work/time_management/.
9.  Linda  Stone,  "Why  Email  Can  Be  Habit-Forming,"  Huffpost  Healthy Living Blog, http://www.huffingtonpost.com/linda-stone/why-email-can-behabit-fo_b_324781.html.
10.  James, Principles of Psychology, 1:402-458.
11.  James, Principles of Psychology, 1:402 (emphasis in original).
12.  Jackson, Distracted, 24.
13.  Jackson, Distracted, 72.
14.  See,  for  example,  Lawrence  Barsalou,  "Grounded  Cognition,"  Annual Review of Psychology 59 (2008): 617-645.

15.  Of the standard university textbooks on cognitive science, perhaps the most  accessible  overview  is  in  John  Anderson,  Cognitive  Psychology  and  Its 
Implications, 6th ed. (New York: Worth, 2004).
16.  Posner's three attentional networks were first introduced over forty years ago. See Michael Posner and Stephen Boises, "Components of Attention," 

Psychological Review 78 (1971): 391-408.
17.  Jackson, Distracted, 25, 239, 243, 247.
18.  See  Michael  Posner,  "Socializing  the  Young  As  Viewed  from  Natural and Social Science Perspectives," keynote address to the University of Michigan  Center  for  Culture,  Mind,  and  the  Brain  Annual  Conference,  April 2010.

19.  See  Michael  Posner  and  Mary  Rothbart,  Educating  the  Human  Brain (Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 2006), for perhaps 
the best retrospect on Posner and Rothbart's work, and for prospects in train-ing for mindfulness.

20.  See Christopher Chabris and Daniel Simons, The Invisible Gorilla: And Other Ways Our Intuitions Deceive Us (New York: Crown, 2010). The experiment that forms the basis of this book was originally reported in Steven B. 

  1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6            ²            |        
Most, Daniel J. Simons, Brian J. Scholl, Rachel Jimenez, Erin Clifford, and Christopher F. Chabris, "How Not to Be Seen: The Contribution of Similarity and Selective Ignoring to Sustained Inattentional Blindness," Psychological Science 12 (2001): 9-17.

21.  Jackson, Distracted, 237. Jackson calls Michael Posner "unarguably the greatest attention scientist of our time" (237).
22.  Howard Pashler explained "attention set" especially well in The Psychol-ogy of Attention (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998), 167-216.
23.  Of the standard university textbooks on cognitive science, perhaps the most  accessible  overview  on  vision  is  Douglas  Medin,  Brian  H.  Ross,  and 
Arthur B.  Markman,  Cognitive Psychology, 3rd ed.  (Fort  Worth: Harcourt, 2001).

24.  Anne  Treisman  and  Garry  Gelade,  "A  Feature-Integration  Theory  of Attention," Cognitive Psychology 12 (1980): 97-136.
25.  On control of the hands, see one of my earlier books, Abstracting Craft: The Practiced Digital Hand (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996), 1-12.
26.  See Joshua S. Rubinstein, David E. Meyer, and Jeffrey E. Evans, "Execu-tive  Control  of  Cognitive  Processes  in Task  Switching,"  Journal  of  Experimental Psychology, Human Perception, and Performance 27 (2001): 763-797.
27.  For an extensive nonspecialist account of the neuroscience of attention and of the widely cited neuroscientist of attention David Meyer in particular, 

see  Jackson,  Distracted.  For  a  classic  technical  account,  see  Rubinstein, Meyer,  and  Evans,  "Executive  Control  of  Cognitive  Processes  in  Task 
Switching."
28.  Ophir, Nass, and Wagner, "Cognitive Control in Media Multitaskers"; see also Avi Solomon, "Eyal Ophir on the Science of Multitasking," BoingBoing, November 7, 2011, http://boingboing.net/.
29.  Steven  Pinker,  "Mind  over  Mass  Media,"  New  York  Times,  June  10, 2010.

30.  Pinker,  "Mind  over  Mass  Media,"  "Experience  does  not  revamp  the basic information-processing capacities of the brain" Pinker went on to write. 
"Speed-reading programs have long claimed to do just that, but the verdict was rendered by Woody Allen after he read War and Peace in one sitting: `It 

was about Russia.'"

        |        1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6            ²      
31.  See Wendy Wood and Leona Tam, "Changing Circumstances, Disrupt-ing Habits," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 88 (2005): 918-933.
32.  See Edward Hall, The Hidden Dimension (New York: Doubleday, 1966). In the 1960s, anthropologist Hall popularized ideas of "social distance," in 
which tacit  knowledge  exists as  a  game  of  inches,  which  he  called  "proxe-mics."  Deskilling  in  those  interpersonal  distances  is  evident  today,  when 
social distances are more often mediated online and face-to-face encounters are becoming more awkward; for example, a retail clerk may now first speak 
to you at some strangely arbitrary range before making eye contact.
33.  See Michael Polanyi, Personal Knowledge: Toward a Post-Critical Philoso-phy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1958).

34.  James  Gleick,  Genius:  The  Life  and  Science  of  Richard  Feynman  (New York: Vintage Books, 1993), 409; Andy Clark, Supersizing the Mind: Embodiment, Action, and Cognitive Extension (New York: Oxford University Press, 2008), xxv.

35.  Stafford, Echo Objects: The Cognitive Work of Images (Chicago: Univer-sity of Chicago Press, 2007), 10-14.
36.  Stafford,  Echo  Objects,  1.  The  opening  of  Stafford's  book  deals  with transdisciplinary challenges in the "cognitive revolution."
37.  James, Principles of Psychology, 1:114.

 & K D S W H U  
1.  Although  I  am  not  a  cognitive  psychologist,  and  have  inevitably  made some generalizations from the literature (see note 1 to chapter 2), embodied 

cognition has been a thread through many of my writings before this one. 
2.  Andy  Clark  and  David  Chalmers,  "The  Extended  Mind,"  Analysis  58 (1998):7-19. Reprinted in Philosopher's Annual 21 (1998): 59-74.

3.  Andy Clark, Being There: Putting Brain, Body and World Together Again (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997), 83.
4.  "You aren't your brain" has been said by any number of people, but, for a fine recent essay, see Alva Noe", "Art and the Limits of Neuroscience," New 
York Times, December 4, 2011.
5.  Victor  Kapetelinin  and  Bonnie  Nardi,  Acting  with  Technology:  Activity Theory and Interaction Design (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006), 29-35.

  1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6            ²            |        
6.  Kapetelinin and Nardi, Acting with Technology, 69-70.
7.  Kapetelinin and Nardi, Acting with Technology, 42.
8.  Bonnie Nardi, "Activity Theory and Human-Computer Interaction," in Context and Consciousness, ed. Bonnie Nardi (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 

1996), 14. My own earlier books looked at the nature of tools and the impor-tance of intent as opposed to behavior. Digital Ground: Architecture, Pervasive 

Computing, and Environmental Knowing (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004) drew as much on the work of Nardi as on that of any other anthropologist. 
And, growing out of my first encounters by way of the cognition research community around Harvard with the work of the seminal Russian activity 
theorists  Lev  Vygotsky  and  Aleksei  Leontiev,  my  1996  book,  Abstracting Craft, remains a good way into the kinds of attention that flow from skillful 
tool use.
9.  Kapetelinin and Nardi, Acting with Technology, 196, closes on "postcogni-tivist" theories: activity theory, distributed cognition, actor-network theory, 

phenomenology, as a range of approaches that are "highly critical of mind-body dualism."

10.  William  Warren,  "Perceiving  Affordances:  Visual  Guidance  of  Stair Climbing," Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 10 (1984): 683-703.
11.  For excellent explanations of habituation, automatic actions, and proce-dural chunks, see John Anderson's classic textbook, Cognitive Psychology and 

Its Implications, 6th ed. (New York: Worth, 2004). 
12.  I am grateful to my colleague Michael Cohen for his clear and penetrat-ing study of routine, and for his many suggestions about other work cited 

here.
13.  William James, Principles of Psychology, 1:121. "Habit a second nature! Habit is ten times nature, the Duke of Wellington is said to have exclaimed" 

(1:120).
14.  A Google search for "runaway ontology" returned fewer than 10 items in January 2012.

15.  Dourish, Where the Action Is, 21.
16. Antonio R. Damasio, Descartes' Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain (New York: Putnam's, 1994).

        |        1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6            ²      
17.  Melvin Goodale and David Milne, "Separate Visual Pathways for Per-ception and Action," Trends in Neuroscience 15 (1992): 20-25.
18.  I am grateful to many of my colleagues at the University of Michigan, itself a situated knowledge community of the highest order, for sharing their 
expertise  on  the  situatedness  of  expertise  and  the  potential  cost  of  excess mediation.

19.  "Situational awareness" has been a part of the "sensemaking" conversa-tions in my university (see note 11 to chapter 5). I cannot say where I first 
was around people making use of this expression. 
20.  Clark, Being There, 46.
21.  See  Lev  Vygotsky,  Thought  and  Language,  rev.  ed.  (Cambridge,  MA: MIT  Press,  1986).  Andy  Clark  gave  ample  interpretation  of  Vygotsky's 

thinking in Being There. I first came across Vygotsky in the early 1990s and continue to find his version of activity theory extremely useful.

22.  My 1996 book, Abstracting Craft, explored the relations of tool, medium, practice, and intent.
23.  Clark, Being There, 45.
24.  Clark, Being There, 83.
25.  My  2004  book,  Digital  Ground,  explored  intentionality  in  habitual contexts.

26.   Bo"hme, "Atmosphere as the Fundamental Concept of a New Aesthet-ics," 125.
27.  See Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience (New York: Harper and Row, 1990).
28.  Rachel  and  Stephen  Kaplan  are  generally  credited  for  the  now  widely used expression "effortless attention." See especially their book The Experience of Nature: A Psychological Perspective (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1989). 

29.  Brian Bruya, Effortless Attention: A New Perspective in the Cognitive Sci-ence of Attention and Action (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010): 3-29.
30.  Bruya, Effortless Attention, 11.
31.  Bruya, Effortless Attention, 12.

  1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6            ²               |        
32.  Stephen Kaplan, "The Restorative Benefits of Nature: Toward an Inte-grative  Framework,"  Journal  of  Environmental  Psychology  15  (1995): 
169-182.
33.  See  Rita Berto, "Exposure to  Restorative Environments Helps Restore Attentional  Capacity,"  Journal  of  Environmental  Psychology  25  (2005): 

249-259.
34.  See Peter Kahn et al., "A Plasma Display Window? The Shifting Base-line  Problem  in  a  Technologically  Mediated  Natural  World,"  Journal  of 

Environmental Psychology 28 (2008): 192-199.
35.  Bruya, Effortless Attention, 5.
36.  Gallagher, Rapt, 2.
37.  Gallagher, Rapt, 9. "Along with the Apollonian task of organizing your world," Gallagher went on to write, "attention enables you to have the kind 

of  Dionysian  experience  beautifully  described  by  the  old-fashioned  term rapt--completely  absorbed,  engrossed,  fascinated,  perhaps  even  "carried 
away" that underlies life's deepest pleasures, from the scholar's study to the carpenter's craft to the lover's obsession" (9-10).

 & K D S W H U  
1.  William J. Mitchell, "In the First Place," in Placing Words: Symbols, Space, and the City (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005), 8. In my long-term work 

of picking up after the great master, this particular piece was an inspiration, more so than his more influential work on smart cities.

2.  Mitchell, "In the First Place," 3.
3.  Mitchell, "In the First Place," 4.
4.  Mitchell, "In the First Place," 9.
5.  Mark Twain, "A True Story, Repeated Word for Word As I Heard It," Atlantic Monthly, November 1874, 591-594. Reprinted in the sesquicentennial anthology Robert Vare and Daniel B. Smith, eds., The American Idea: The  Best  of  the  Atlantic  Monthly  (New  York:  Atlantic  Monthly,  2007), 
28-33.
6.  Mitchell, Placing Words, 13.
7.  My 2004 book, Digital Ground, likewise addressed habit, but only with respect to reestablishing embodiment and pattern for digital design and not 

        |        1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²         
with  the  present  emphasis  on  the  economics  of  attention.  A  few  remarks from "Habitual Contexts," chapter 3 of that book, are echoed here.
8.  As cited in Digital Ground, interactivity scholar Paul Dourish has observed: "At the heart of tangible computing is the relationship between activities and 
the space in which they are carried out. Tangible computing expands this in three  ways:  through  the  configuration  of  space,  through  the  relationship  of 

body to task, and through physical constraints." Dourish, Where the Action Is, 158.

9.  See Victor Kapetelinin and Bonni Nardi, Acting with Technology: Activity Theory  and  Interaction  Design  (Cambridge,  MA:  MIT  Press,  2006).  For 

detailed citations, see chapter 4 of this volume.
10.  Thus at Xerox PARC in the 1990s, where the ideas of ubiquitous com-puting first took form, there was active work by Daniel Russell, Peter Pirolli, 

and colleagues on sensemaking and by Lucy Suchman and colleagues on situ-ated  actions.  See,  for  example,  Daniel  M.  Russell,  Mark  J.  Stefik,  Peter 
Pirolli, and Stuart K. Card, "The Cost Structure of Sensemaking," in Inter-CHI 1993, 269-276.

11.  Karl Weick, "Sensemaking," in International Encyclopedia of Organiza-tional Studies (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2008), 4:1403-1406. See also Karl 
E .Weick, Kathleen M. Sutcliffe, and David Obstfeld, "Organizing and the Process of Sensemaking," Organization Science 16 (2005): 409-421.

12.  I am grateful  to  my colleague Erik  Hofer for suggesting this  everyday example.

 & K D S W H U  
1.  Claudia Walde, Sticker City:Paper  Graffiti Art (New York: Thames and Hudson, 2007), 38.

2.  David Pescovitz, "Graffiti at the National Portrait Gallery," February 20, 2008, http://boingboing.net/2008/02/20/graffiti-at-the-nati.html.
3.  Dan Witz, as quoted in Walde, Sticker City, 51.
4.  My own experience  of New York began and was mainly shaped in the 1970s.

5.  See Joe Austin, Taking the Train: How Graffiti Art Became an Urban Crisis in New York City (New York: Columbia University Press, 2001).

  1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²               |        
6.  James Wilson and George Keiling, "Broken Windows," Atlantic Monthly, March 1982.
7.  See iwishthiswas.cc.
8.  Walde, Sticker City, 9.
9.  Walde, Sticker City, 38.
10. As of January 2012, the augmented reality (AR) business appeared ready to explode. Google's fall 2001 announcement of plans for Google Glasses, a massmarket  wearable  AR  overlay  platform  in  the  form  of  stylish  eyeglasses,  had much to do with this. Former Nokia director Tomi Ahonen proclaimed AR 
"the eighth mass medium," and predicted a billion users within a decade. (See http://tedxtalks.ted.com/video/TEDxMongKok-Tomi-Ahonen-Augment). 
Elsewhere, MetaIO, a leading European AR company, posted that, "According to Gartner Inc., Augmented Reality is one of the Top 10 strategic IT technologies of our time. And Juniper Research forecasts $1.5 billion revenue stream by 2015.  (See  http://www.metaio.com/company/company/).  Under  these  circumstances, this slower-moving work of print, on its way to press, cannot say much, but can hope for increased (if indirect) relevance.

11.  In information design, and with possible lessons for new forms of urban inscriptions, there follows a debate about bottom-up versus top-down forms. 
Classification schemes traditionally were top-down and sought to be compre-hensive on their designated topics. A taxonomy (such as a library would use 

to shelve this book in exactly one place), is a top-down, tree-structured hier-archy. Or, for nonhierarchical classification, an information designer might 
develop  an  ontology,  an  existential  term  appropriated  from  metaphysics  to deal with markup languages' capacity for bottom-up schemas.

12.  Bradley H. McLean, An Introduction to Greek Epigraphy of the Hellenistic and Roman Periods from Alexander the Great until Constantine (Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan Press, 2002), 2.
13.  Victor Hugo, The Hunchback of Notre Dame, book V, chapter 2, "This Will Kill That," as translated by Isabel F. Hapgood in 1861.

14.  See Henkin, City Reading, 69-136, on the many forms of print used at street level. 
15.  Taubman College at the University of Michigan, my own place of work, operates a robotic water jet for cutting slab stone.

        |        1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²         
16.  Ferguson, Paris as Revolution, 16.
17.  Ferguson, Paris as Revolution, 29.
18.  Ferguson, Paris as Revolution, 39.
19.  Society of Environmental Graphic Design, www.segd.org.
20.  National Gallery of Scotland. Signspotting exhibition, summer 2009.
21.  Erik Davis, "Urban Markup Language," Wired, September 2004.
22.  Photography  section  headings,  Eric  Sadin,  Times  of  the  Signs  (Berlin: Springer, 2003).

23.  See  http://www.graffitiresearchlab.com/blog/.  A  Google  search  for "LED throwies" yielded more than 100,000 hits in February 2009.
24.  Ethan Todras-Whitehill, "Making Connections Here and Now," New York Times, January 25, 2006.
25.  Camille Johnson, "Yellow Arrow Aimed at Building Art Community," Harvard Crimson, November 19, 2004.

26.  Daily  RFID  press  release,  December  2008,  http://www.rfid-in-china.com/products_667_1.html: "DAILY RFID has unveiled mini RFID Sticker 
Tag-08 (measured in dia. 9 mm) for use in most RFID applications, includ-ing directly on metallic surfaces. This adhesive RFID Sticker tag can easily be 
affixed to on flat and clean surfaces with its 3M Glue."
27.  See Avery Dennison Inc.'s website: http://rfid.averydennison.com/
28.  Bruce Sterling, "arphid watch," http://www.wired.com/beyond_the_beyond /category/arphid-watch/.

29.  See the Situated Technologies pamphlet series, edited by Omar Kahn, Trevor Scholz, and Mark Shepard, published by the Architecture League of 
New York, and begun in 2006.
30.  Richard Sennett, The Conscience of the Eye: The Design and Social Life of Cities (New York: Norton, 1990), 205.

 & K D S W H U  
1.  See www.displaybank.com. Displaybank is a leading market research con-sultancy in display and photovoltaic panels.

  1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²               |        
2.  See Anna McCarthy, Ambient Television: Visual Culture and Public Space (Durham:  Duke  University  Press,  2002),  whose  cover  image  has  just  that 
juxtaposition.
3.  See Hannah Higgins, The Grid Book (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007).
4.  David  Nye,  Electrifying  America:  Social  Meanings  of  a  New  Technology (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992), 34-41.

5.  Walter  Benjamin,  "One  Way  Street:  This  Space  for  Rent,"  in  Selected Writings, vol. 1 (1913-26), ed. Marcus Bullock and Michael W. Jennings, 
trans.  Rodney  Livingstone  (Cambridge,  MA:  Harvard  University  Press, 1996), 476.

6.  References to Pittsburgh here and in later chapters come from my having grown up there.
7.  Neal Stephenson, Snow Crash (New York: Bantam, 1992), 5.
8.  See  Christa  Van  Santen,  Light  Zone  City:  Light  Planning  in  the  Urban Context (Basel: Birkhauser, 2006).

9.  The existence of a signage district implies restraint elsewhere in the city. Chaotic illuminations can produce distress among those who must live with 
them. To many, the experience of a huge, full-motion video facade is espe-cially uncomfortable, suggesting that something that large needs more minimalist programming. Thus, as a revolution in display technology diversifies the scales and resolutions of surfaces that glow, it invites an environmental 
history and criticism.
10.  Among signage aficionados, there exists no better indicator of America's overall cultural decline than the replacement (made infamous in Gary Hustwit's 2007 film Helvetica) of a classic space-age motel sign in Sedalia, Mis-souri, by a generic boxed backlit sign with tacky typography and gratuitous 
graduated background fill.
11.  While on sabbatical in Berkeley and writing an earliest draft of Ambient Commons in January 2010, I could watch the billboard on the Bay Bridge 

approach change images, from several miles away in the hills.
12.  KCET  public  television  station,  "Billboard  Confidential,"  October  9, 2008, www.kcet.org/shows/socal_connected/content/environment/billboards/

13.  Louis M. Brill, "Media Facades: High-Tech Building Wraps," SignIn-dustry.com,  February  16,  2009,  http://www.signindustry.com/outdoor/

        |        1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²         
articles/2009-02-16-LB-LED_Media_Facades_High-Tech_Digital_Building_Wraps.php3.
14.  www.mediaarchitecture.org/kings-road-tower/.
15.  Valenta Croci, "Dynamic Light: The Media Facades of realities:united," Architectural Design 80, no. 1 (January-February 2010): 136-139.

16.  Carlos Ferre', "INSIGHT: Iconic Architecture in the Digital Age," Arch-NewsNow.com,  March  23,  2010,  http://www.archnewsnow.com/features/
Feature324.htm. Ferre''s company A2aMedia introduced MediaMesh to North America.

17.  Le Corbusier, Vers une architecture (Paris: G. Cre`s, 1924), "The history of  architecture  is  the  history  of  the  struggle  for  light,  the  struggle  for 
windows."
18.   On facades as screens, see Mark C. Taylor, The Moment of Complexity: Emerging  Network  Culture  (Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press,  2001), 

"From Grid to Network," 19-46. "Here it becomes undeniable that `busi-ness art is,' as Warhol insists, `the step that comes after Art,'" 46

19.  Anne Friedberg, The Virtual Window: From Alberti to Microsoft (Cam-bridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006).
20.  Leon Battista Alberti, as quoted in Friedberg, The Virtual Window, 27.
21.  Friedberg, The Virtual Window, 101-149, 192.
22.  Friedberg, The Virtual Window, 78.
23.  Friedberg, The Virtual Window, 80.
24.  On the composite as the most characteristic operation of digital media, see  Lev  Manovich,  Language  of  New  Media  (Cambridge,  MA:  MIT  Press, 

2002), 136-161.
25.  How  odd  for  a  technology  whose  advantage  is  the  absence  of  backlit glow to make a brand of the act of lighting up: Kindle(R).

26.  "Magink enables an indoor video to be enhanced and blended into the surrounding environment without dominating, as other light emitting technologies  do,"  http://catalogs.infocommiq.com/avcat/ctl4552/index.cfm? manufacturer=magink-display-technologies&product=magink-indoor.

27.  Transflective(TM) is a trademark of Pixel Qi.

  1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²               |        
28.  Susanne Seitinger, "Liberated Pixels: Alternative Narratives for Lighting Future Cities," Ph.D. diss., MIT Media Lab, 2010.
29.  William  J.  Mitchell,  "Smart  City  2020:  Emerging  Technologies  Are Poised to Reshape Our Urban Environments," Metropolis, March 20, 2006, 
http://www.metropolismag.com/story/20060320/smart-city-2020.
30.  Giulio  Jacucci,  Ann  Morrison,  Gabriela  Richard,  Jari  Kleimola,  Peter Peltonen,  Lorenza  Parisi,  and  Toni  Laitinen,  "Worlds  of  Information: 

Designing for Engagement at a Public Multi-touch Display," in ACM CHI 2010, 2267-2276. See also Peter Peltonen, Esko Kurvinen, Antti Salovaara, 
Giulio  Jacucci,  Tommi  Ilmonen,  John  Evans,  Antti  Oulasvirta,  and  Petri Saarikko, "It's Mine, Don't Touch!: Interactions at a Large Multi-touch Display in a City Center," in ACM CHI 2008, 1285-1294.
31.  Peter  Gall  Krogh,  Martin  Ludvigsen,  Andreas  Lykke-Olesen,  Aarhus School of Architecture and Kaspar Rosengreen Nielsen, Computer Science, 

University of Aarhus, iFloor, Aarhus Municipal Library. http://www.interac-tivespaces.net/news/news.php?newsId=26.

32.  It is especially regrettable when project managers value-engineer ceilings down to cheaper and more generic materials. One memorable instance of this 
is the arrivals hall in Austin-Bergstrom Airport (opened in 1999), where the ornamental  ceiling  in  the  originally  accepted  design  was  value-engineered 
into a nondescript plain one.
33.  My  2004  book,  Digital  Ground,  explored  these  mental  mappings  of place.

34.  Clay  Shirky,  Here  Comes  Everybody:  The  Power  of  Organizing  without Organizations (New York: Penguin, 2009), 81.
35.  See Anna Klingman, Brandscapes: Architecture and the Experience Econ-omy (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007).

 & K D S W H U  
1.  Stephen  Berlin  Johnson,  The  Invention  of  Air:  A  Story  of  Science,  Faith, Revolution,  and  the  Birth  of  America  (New  York:  Riverhead  Books,  2008), 

87-94. Priestley built a means to de-phlogistinate air. Only later did Lavoisier come up with the name still used for what Priestley discovered: oxygen.

2.  MIT Project Oxygen. http://oxygen.csail.mit.edu/.

        |        1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²         
3.  Interlink Research Consortium, "State of the Art in Ambient Computing and Communication Environments," Information Society Technology Advisory  Group  (ISTAG),  advisory  body  to  the  European  Commission,  2008, http://interlink.ics.forth.gr/ConsultationForum/Files/InterLink_WG2_
State_of_the_Art_Report.pdf.
4.  Bruno  Latour,  "Air,"  in  Caroline  A.  Jones,  ed.,  Sensorium:  Embodied Experience, Technology, and Contemporary Art (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 

2006), 104-107. 
5.  J.!M.!W. Turner retrospective, New York Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2008. http://www.metmuseum.org/exhibitions/jmw_turner/more.asp.

6.  Sergio  Leone,  Once  Upon  a  Time  in  the  West,  1968.  Sound  by  Ennio Morricone.
7.  Bo"hme, "Atmosphere as the Fundamental Concept of a New Aesthetics," 116.

8.  Bo"hme, "Atmosphere," 116.
9.  "And aura is clearly something which flows forth spatially," Bo"hme wrote of Benjamin walking in the shadow of mountains, "almost something like a 

breath or a haze--precisely an atmosphere. Benjamin says that one `breathes' the aura." Bo"hme, "Atmosphere," 117.

10.  Prendergast,  The  Ambient  Century,  8-11.  "For  many  modern  music began  with  the  `voluptuous  ambience'  of  Pre'lude  a`  l'apre`s-midi  d'un  faune 
(Prelude  to  the  Afternoon  of  a  Faun),  composed  in  (1894)"  (8).  Debussy's most famous aphorism involved air, incidentally: "The century of airplanes 
deserves a music of its own."
11.  Robert  Morris,  "Notes  on  Sculpture,  1-3,"  Artforum  (4:6),  February 1966: 42-44; (5:2), October 1966: 20-23; (5:10) June 1967: 24-29.

12.   Stafford, Echo Objects, 31.
13.  My colleague Amy Kulper has been very helpful in explaining this gen-erational identity in atmospheric design.

14.  Cynthia  Zarin,  "Seeing  Things:  The  Art  of  Olafur  Eliasson,"  New Yorker, November 13, 2006. "This year, Eliasson has had twelve solo shows 
around the world.!.!.!. Until recently, Eliasson said yes to most of the projects he was offered. Now he accepts just one percent."

15.  Zarin, "Seeing Things."

  1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²               |        
16.  Husserl establishes a core for the phenomenology that the human-com-puter interaction discipline has built toward tangible interfaces. See Dourish, 
Where the Action Is.
17.  Zarin, "Seeing Things."
18.  For my part, I lay there until closing time, about two hours in all.
19.  Writing on the embodied experience in The Weather Project, Stafford observed: "One might have thought that mirror neurons--only visually activated when another agent is observed acting in purposeful ways with other agents or things--would clarify this existential ambiguity. But as Eliassson's 
installation brilliantly shows, it does not." Stafford, Echo Objects, 134.
20.  Philippe  Rahm,  audio  interview  with  Domus  magazine,  2009.  http://domusweb.it/en/architecture/philippe-rahm-audio-interview/.

21.  Philippe  Rahm,  interview  with  Archinect  blog,  http://archinect.com/features/article/96362/philippe-rahm-part-1. 
22.  Peter Zumthor, Atmospheres (Basel: Birkhauser, 2006). Zumthor's nine sensibilities and approaches are as follows:
The body of architecture: "the material presence of things in a piece of archi-tecture; its frame" (21) "Not the idea of the body--the body itself!" (23).
Material compatibility: "An extraordinary sense of the presence and weight of materials" (28).
The sound of a space: "Listen! Interiors are like large instruments, collecting sound, amplifying it, transmitting it elsewhere" (29).
The  temperature  of  a  space:  "It  is  well  known  that  materials  more  or  less extract the warmth from our bodies" (33).
Surrounding objects: "I'm impressed by the things people keep around them" (35).
Between composure and seduction: "The feeling that I am not being directed but can stroll at will--just drifting along, you know?" (43).
Tension  between  interior  and  exterior:  "An  incredible  sense  of  place,  an unbelievable  feeling  of  concentration  when  we  suddenly  become  aware  of 
being enclosed, of something enveloping us, keeping us together, holding us, whether we be many or single" (47).

Levels of intimacy: "It all has to do with proximity and distance" (49).

        |        1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²         
The light on things: "To plan the building as a pure mass of shadows then, afterwards, to put in light as if you were hollowing out the darkness, as if the 

light were a new mass seeping in.!.!.!. To go about lighting materials and surfaces systematically and to look at the way they reflect the light" (59).

23.  Zumthor, Atmospheres, 42-44.
24.  Luis Ferna'ndez-Galiano, Fire and Memory: On Architecture and Energy (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000), 4-6, 66.

25.  Ferna'ndez-Galiano, Fire and Memory, 213.
26.  The expression "conditioned by air" has been in the air, with each of us making  our  own  reexpressions  of  it,  after  Peter  Sloterdijk.  The  expression 

"air-condition"  popularized  this,  after  Bruno  Latour,  "Air-Condition:  Our New Political Fate," Domus (868), March 2004.

27.  On  a  warming  planet,  demand  for  cooling  technology  might  only increase,  even  as  the  electricity  it  consumes  contributes  to  still  more 
warming.
28.  Marsha Ackerman, Cool Comfort: America's Romance with Air-Condition-ing (Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 2002), 35, 44. Several 

advertisements from the Carrier Corporation highlight this excellent social history.

29.  Michelle  Addington,  "Good-Bye,  Willis  Carrier"  (1997),  reprinted  in Kim Tanzer and Rafael Longoria, eds., The Green Braid (New York: Routledge, 2007), 160.
30.  Le Corbusier, as quoted in Addington, "Good-bye, Willis Carrier," 160.
31.  Reyner  Banham,  The  Architecture  of  the  Well-tempered  Environment. (London: Architectural Press, 1969), 209-212.

32.  Banham, Well-tempered Environment, 12, 11.
33.  Banham, Well-tempered Environment, 187. This passage is highlighted in my  vintage  copy  from  undergraduate  years,  amid  the  first  oil  crisis  of  the 

1970s.
34.  Lisa Heschong, Thermal Delight in Architecture (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1979), 17-19.

35.  Addington, "Good-bye, Willis Carrier," 160.
36.  Henry  Miller,  The  Air-Conditioned  Nightmare,  1945  (San  Francisco: New Directions, 1970).

  1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²               |        
37.  Peter Jon Lindberg, "Bad Music in Public Spaces: With More and More Hotels,  Restaurants,  and  Retailers  Adopting  Music  as  a  Branding  Device, 
T+L Sounds Off on How Their Choices Speak Volumes," Travel and Lei-sure, November 2009. Byline: "Peter Jon Lindberg, Travel + Leisure's editorat-large, never leaves home without noise-canceling headphones."
38.   Lindberg, "Bad Music in Public Spaces." On stress, Lindberg cited the Argentine-born conductor Daniel Barenboim, who found "the creep of background music into every corner of public life, calling it `as disturbing [as] the most despicable aspect of pornography.'"

39.  Joseph Lanza, Elevator Music: A Surreal History of Muzak(R), Easy-Listen-ing, and Other Moodsong(R) (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2004), 
207.
40.  Lanza, Elevator Music, 39-40.
41.  Lanza, Elevator Music, 22, 28.
42.  Lanza,  Elevator  Music,  206.  More  trippy  still:  a  string  version  of  Iron Butterfly's "In-Na-Gadda-Da-Vida" (1969) also exists.

43.  Lanza, Elevator Music, 3.
44.  Drone Zone, founded by Rusty Hodge, was the first station (streaming since  February  2000)  on  San  Francisco-based,  listener  supported  somafm.

com: "Served best chilled, safe with most medications. Atmospheric textures with minimal beats."

45.  Lindberg, "Bad Music in Public Spaces."
46.  Lanza, Elevator Music, 212.
47.   Ove Arup Associates, "San Francisco Federal Building," 2006, http://www.arup.com/Projects/San_Francisco_Federal_Building.aspx.

48.    Randy  Shaw,  "San  Francisco's  Green  Building  Nightmare,"  2008, www.beyondchron.org/news/ ("The verdict on the structure's function as an 
office space for federal employees is nearly unanimous: it is a disaster"); Ove Arup  Associates,  "San  Francisco  Federal  Building,"  2006  ("By  forgoing  a 
mechanical cooling system, the GSA was able to save U.S.$11m in construc-tion costs and cites annual operational savings of U.S.$500,000").

49.  Norbert A. Streitz, "Ambient Computing and the Disappearing Com-puter," in Norbert A. Streitz, Jo"rg Geissler, and Torsten Holmer, eds., Ambiente:  Workspaces  of  the  Future,  1998,  1.  See  also  Norbert  A.  Streitz,  Jo"rg 

        |        1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²         
Geissler, and Torsten Holmer, "Roomware for Cooperative Buildings: Inte-grated Design of Architectural Spaces and Information Spaces," in Norbert 
A. Streitz, Shin'ichi Konomi, and Heinz-Ju"rgen Burkhardt, eds., Cooperative Buildings:  Integrating  Information,  Organization,  and  Architecture,  Proceedings  of  the  First  International  Workshop  (CoBuild  '98)  (Berlin:  Springer, 1998), 4-21.

50.  "IBM  Smarter  Buildings  Survey  White  Paper,"  2010,  www-03.ibm.com/press/.
51.  Thanks to Bruce Nordman of Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory for insight-ful conversation on the costs and benefits of designing interfaces for increased 
participation in indoor comfort.
52.  Raymond Cole and Zosia Brown, "Reconciling Human and Automated Intelligence  in  the  Provision  of  Occupant  Comfort,"  Intelligent  Buildings 

International 1 (2009): 39-55.
53.  Hill, "New Soft City."

 & K D S W H U  
1.  Adam Greenfield, "The City Is Here for You to Use," 2009, unpublished manuscript

2.   The United Nations defines a megacity as any urban agglomeration with over  10  million  inhabitants.  Richard  Saul  Wurman's  19.20.21  project, 
named for nineteen cities of 20 million inhabitants in the twenty-first cen-tury, aims to introduce comparative standards for urban data mapping. See 
www.192021.org.
3.   A Lexis-Nexis word search for "smart cities" in world news media over the last  thirty years yielded approximately 1,000  results in February 2011, 

two-thirds from the last ten years.
4.  A Lexis-Nexis word search for "smart grid" in world news media over the last thirty years yielded approximately 1,000 results in February 2011; half 

from the last four years, and the earliest from 2003.
5.  A  word  search  for  "urban  computing"  on  the  ACM  digital  library,  the standard among databases of information technology research yielded only 

about 150 results in December 2010, almost all since the 2006 IEEE Perva-sive Computing conference, with the first repeat use apparently by Eric Paulos.

  1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²               |        
6.  Even by February 2011, there were only a handful of news search results for "urban informatics" on  Lexis-Nexis; in February 2011  there were only 
about 50 news search results on the ACM digital library, none before 2007, with the first repeat use apparently by Marcus Foth.

7.  See  Howard  Rheingold,  "Cities,  Swarms,  Cell  Phones:  The  Birth  of Urban  Informatics,"  September  2003,  http://www.thefeaturearchives.com/
topic/Culture/Cities__Swarms__Cell_Phones__The_Birth_of_Urban_Informatics.html.  Reviewing  work  by  Anthony  Townsend  and  Steve 

Johnson.
8.  See William J. Mitchell, City of Bits: Space, Place, and the Infobahn (Cam-bridge, MA,  MIT Press, 1995); e-topia:  "Urban  Life,  Jim--but  Not  As  We 

Know It" (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999); and Me++: The Cyborg Self and the Networked City (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003).

9.  William J. Mitchell, "Smart City 2020: Emerging technologies are poised to reshape our urban  environments," Metropolis. March 20, 2006.  "As the 
cities and their components become smarter, they begin to take new shapes and patterns. They become programmable. And the design of their software 
becomes as crucial--socially, economically, and culturally--as that of their hardware."

10.  See SENSEable City Laboratory, MIT, main web page, April 2011, sen-seable.mit.edu.
11.  Dan Hill, "Towards a New Architect: An Interview with Carlo Ratti," City of Sound, March 9, 2009, http://www.cityofsound.com/blog/2009/07/
towards-a-new-architect-an-interview-with-carlo-ratti.html.
12.  Mike Kuniavsky, "Information Is a Material," in Smart Things: Ubiqui-tous Computing User Experience Design (San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann, 

2010), 44. "Just as most consumers do not spend much time differentiating which parts of a device are made of glass, metal or silicon, they do not spend 
much time identifying which effects they experience are created by hardware, which  by  software  and  which  by  services.  They  see  the  device  as  a  single 
thing" (46).
13.  Interlink Research Consortium, "State of the Art in Ambient Comput-ing  and  Communication  Environments,"  Information  Society  Technology 

Advisory  Group  (ISTAG),  advisory  body  to  the  European  Commission, 2008, http://interlink.ics.forth.gr/ConsultationForum/Files/InterLink_WG2 
_State_of_the_Art_Report.pdf.  This  initiative  foresaw  a  move  toward  a 

        |        1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²         
"substrate" of information, similar to the usual "Internet of things" idea. It follows  from  an  earlier  EU-funded  proactive  initiative,  the  Disappearing 
Computer.
14.  Susanne  Dirks,  Constantin  Gurdgiev,  and  Mary  Keeling,  "Smarter Cities for Smarter Growth: How Cities Can Optimize Their Systems for the 

Talent-Based Economy," IBM Institute for Business Value, Executive Report 2010,  June  29,  2010,  15,  http://www.zurich.ibm.com/pdf/isl/infoportal/
IBV_SC3_report_GBE03348USEN.pdf.
15.   See http://www.aqueousadvisors.com/blog/?p=641.
16.  See "Street Computing: Workshop Proceedings," Melbourne, Novem-ber 2009, http://eprints.qut.edu.au/31086/1/31086.pdf.

17.  "Street Computing: Workshop Proceedings."
18.   Marcus Foth, Eric Paulos, Christine Satchell, and Paul Dourish, "Perva-sive Computing and Environmental Sustainability: Two Conference Workshops," IEEE Pervasive Computing 8 (January 2009): 80, http://eprints.qut.edu.au/17164/1 /c17164.pdf.

19.  Evgeny Morozov, "Death of the Cyberflaneur," New York Times, Febru-ary 4, 2012.
20.  See  Simon  Sadler,  The  Situationist  City  (Cambridge,  MA:  MIT  Press, 1998).
21.  Guy  Debord,  On  the  Passage  of  a  Few  Persons  through  a  Rather  Brief Unity of Time, 1959, film.
22.  For what is perhaps still the most accessible work on interpersonal dis-tance, see Hall, The Hidden Dimension.
23.  Hill, "Towards a New Architect."
24.  Richard  Sennett,  The  Craftsman  (New  Haven:  Yale  Press,  2008), 286-296.

25.  See lirneasia.net. "Bottom of the pyramid" offends as an expression, for it implies dominance by a small few elsewhere, uniformity of goals and processes, and benefit to the pyramid itself as the main motive for development.
26.  See www.quividi.com.
27.  One such target audio beam technology is Audio SpotLight(TM). See http://www.holosonics.com.

  1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²               |        
28.  As of March 2011, outside.in had been acquired by AOL, to comple-ment its  (more  suburban)  hyperlocal  news  service,  Patch.  See  http://www.
stevenberlinjohnson.com/2011/03/aol-oi.html
29.  Marcus Foth, Laura Forlano, Christine Satchell, and Martin Gibbs, eds., From  Social  Butterfly  to  Engaged  Citizen:  Urban  Informatics,  Social  Media, 

Ubiquitous Computing, and Mobile Technology to Support Citizen Engagement (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012).

30.  Beatrice da Costa et al., Pigeon Blog, 2006. See http://www.beatrizdacosta.net/pigeonblog.php.
31.  See www.noisetube.net.
32.  Eric Paulos, R. J. Honicky, and Ben Hooker, "Citizen Science: Enabling Participatory  Urbanism,"  in  Marcus  Foth,  ed.,  Handbook  of  Research  on 

Urban Informatics (Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference, 2009), 419.
33.  Paulos, Honicky, and Hooker, "Citizen Science."
34.  Jong-Sung  Hwang,  "u-City:  The  Next  Paradigm  of  Urban  Develop-ment," in Foth, ed., Handbook of Research on Urban Informatics, 371.

35.  "For Cities to Become Truly Smart, Everything Must Be Connected," Economist, special issue, "Living on a Platform," November 4, 2010.
36.  Sara Corbett, "Can the Cellphone Help End Global Poverty?" Profile of Jan  Chipchase,  New  York  Times  Magazine,  April  13,  2008,  http://www
.nytimes.com/2008/04/13/magazine/13anthropology-t.html?_r=1.
37.  Paul Dourish and Genevieve Bell, "The Infrastructure of Experience and the  Experience  of  Infrastructure:  Meaning  and  Structure  in  Everyday 

Encounters  with  Space,"  Environment  and  Planning  B  34  (2007):  418. "Infrastructure is analytically useful, both because it is embedded into social 
structures, and because it serves as a structuring mechanism in itself" (418). Here is an argument for intrinsic information.

38.  Elinor Ostrom, Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective  Action  (Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press,  1990),  214.  In 
contrast,  the  top-down  models  of  a  less  networked  era  too  often  assume "complete  information,  independent  action,  perfect  symmetry  of  interests, 
no  human  errors,  no  norms  of  reciprocity,  zero  monitoring  enforcement costs" (191).

        |        1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²         
39.  Julian Bleecker and Nicolas Nova, "A Synchronicity: Design Fictions for Asynchronous Urban Computing," Situated Technologies, 2009 (Architecture  League  of  New  York  Pamphlets,  5),  http://www.situatedtechnologies.net/files/ST5-A_synchronicity.pdf.

40.  Charlie Michaels and Bird (sign painter), the Night Sky Billboard Proj-ect, 2011, http://vimeo.com/22428957. In Detroit, you should still be able 
to see maps of the project's start displayed on unrented billboards.
41.  See David Bollier, "Growth of the Commons Paradigm," in Charlotte Hess and Elinor Ostrom, eds., Understanding Knowledge as a Commons: From 

Theory to Practice (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007), 27-40.
42.  Georg Simmel, "The Metropolis and Mental Life" (1903), in The Sociol-ogy of Georg Simmel, ed. and trans. Kurt Wolf (New York: Free Press, 1950), 

4 (413).
43.  Jonathan  Crary,  Suspensions  of  Perception:  Attention,  Spectacle,  and Modem Culture, (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1999), 49.

44.  Crary, Suspensions of Perception, 13.
45.  Georg Simmel, "The Metropolis and Mental Life,"1.
46.  Simmel, "The Metropolis and Mental Life." This from the translation most often found online, as at the Blackwell site that comes up first in search 

(in January 2010); but it is not clearly attributed. Is it Levine 1976? Others have used the earlier Wolf translation by which the essay was first brought 
back  into  regular  use  in  the  United  States:  "the  intensification  of  nervous stimulation, resulting from the rapid crowding of changing images, the sharp 
discontinuity  in  the  grasp  of  a  single  glance,  and  the  unexpectedness  of onrushing  impressions.  These  are  the  psychological  conditions  which  the 
metropolis  creates."  For  instance,  Michael  Hays  used  that  one  in  an  essay that  helped  revive  interest.  "Critical  Architecture:  Between  Culture  and 
Form," Perspecta 21 (1984).
47.  Simmel, "The Metropolis and Mental Life," 4.
48.  See David Frisby, Georg Simmel (London: Tavistock, 1984). Early in the work of postmodern social criticism, Frisby revived Simmel, who unlike his 

contemporaries Durkheim and Weber had been largely forgotten.
49.  "The  focus  on  everyday  life,  the  essayistic  style,  and  the  general  resis-tance  to  master  schemas  that  made  Simmel  unattractive  to  high  modern 

sociologists made him ideal to the postmodernists." Frisby, Georg Simmel.

  1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²               |        
50.  "Extremities and peculiarities and individualizations must be produced and they must be over exaggerated merely to be brought into the awareness 
of even the individual himself." Simmel, "The Metropolis and Mental Life," 2.

51.  "From one angle, life is made infinitely more easy in the sense that stim-ulations, interests, and the taking up of time and attention present themselves 
from all sites and carry it in a stream which scarcely requires any individual efforts for its ongoing. But from another angle, life is composed more and 
more  of  these  impersonal  cultural  elements  and  existing  goods  and  values which  seek  to  suppress  peculiar  personal  interests  and  incomparabilities." 
Simmel, "The Metropolis and Mental Life," 9.
52.  Simmel, "The Metropolis and Mental Life," 2.

 & K D S W H U   
1.  Paul Shepheard, The Cultivated Wilderness: Or, What Is Landscape? (Cam-bridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997), 233. "Be aware of the strategy that governs 

what you do" (233).
2.  "Don't call it Romanticism!" may have first been said in the imperative by Charlene Spretnak in her book The Resurgence of the Real: Body, Nature, and 

Place in a Hypermodern World (New York: Routledge, 1997), 131-135.
3.    "Old  scenarios  of  environmental  meltdown  today  seem  nai"ve  in  their apocalyptic dress. People have become too sophisticated--and also too habituated to crisis--to respond simplistically to end-of-the-world alarm sounding. This increase in crisis sophistication does not, of course, mean that the crisis 
itself has gone away. Instead it indicates that more and more, crisis has become part of the milieu in which people, even in the crisis-denying United States, 
increasingly dwell." Lawrence Buell, From Apocalypse to Way of Life: Environ-mental Crisis in the American Century (New York: Routledge, 2004), 75-76.

4.  See Jared Diamond, Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies (New York: Norton, 1997). "Westward runs the course of empire" is attributed to the eighteenth-century philosopher George Berkeley, after whom the hometown of a far western university was named.

5.  Grey Brechlin, Imperial San Francisco: Urban Power, Earthly Ruin (Berke-ley: University of California Press, 1999). 13-70.

        |        1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²         
6.  Donald Worster, The Ends of the Earth: Perspectives on Modern Environ-mental History, ed. Donald Worster (New York: Cambridge University Press, 
1988), 289.
7.  Worster, The Ends of the Earth, 293. Reflecting back on the first decades of  "doing  environmental  history,"  Worster  emphasized  how  artifacts  had 

been excluded from the  origins of this  field. "The social environment, the scene of humans only interactive with each other in the absence of nature, is 

therefore excluded. Likewise is the built or artifactual environment, the clus-ter of things that people have made and which can be so pervasive as to constitute a kind of `second nature' around them" (292).
8.  It would be inaccurate to trace such generalizations about criticism to any single source, but if I had to pick one, it would be Dave Hickey's famous 

essay "Air Guitar," in Air Guitar: Essays on Art and Democracy (Los Angeles: Art Issues Press, 1997), 163-171.

9.  Lawrence  Buell,  The  Future  of  Environmental  Criticism:  Environmental Crisis and Literary Imagination (Oxford: Blackwell, 2005), 17-28. Here, in 
"The  Environmental  Turn  Anatomized,"  Buell  investigates  the  social  con-struction of science, in the manner of Latour, but recognizes that literature 

also identifies fields and creates terms.
10.  "Raymond  Williams'  The  Country  and  the  City  (1973)  .! .! .  has  been praised as a masterpiece of ecocriticism avant la lettre [i.e., ontologically].!.!.!. 

Williams  more  closely  anticipated  later  literature-and-environment  studies, in his keen interest in the facts of environmental history, [and] in literature's 
(mis)representation of them." Buell, The Future of Environmental Criticism, 14, 15.

11.  William Cronon, Nature's Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West (New York: Norton, 1991). Of interest to smart-city technologists, Cronon's work 
also  shows  how  the  network  effects  involved  in  those  transformations  led toward abstraction and acceleration of strategy, such as futures trading.

12.  John  Stilgoe,  Metropolitan  Corridor:  Railroads  and  the  American  Scene (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1983), 21-45. In graduate seminars, I 
still use this classic study of the railroads as "gateway" onto network studies.
13.  Adam Markham, A Brief History of Pollution (London: Earthscan, 1994), 54.

  1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²               |        
14.  Lewis Mumford, Technics and Civilization (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1936), 167, 255.
15.  "The  debate  around  pollution revolves  around  definitions, ethics,  and attitudes toward nature. What is pollution? Is it wrong to pollute? Who is 
responsible? Who or what is suffering and how?" Markham, A Brief History of Pollution, 25.

16.  See  Chris  Leinberger,  "The  Next  Slum,"  Atlantic,  March  2008.  Lein-berger's essay soared to the top of the Atlantic's most-mailed list and stayed 

there for several weeks.
17.  David Owen, "Green Manhattan: Why New York Is the Greenest City in the U.S.," New Yorker, October 18, 2004.

18.  Sitting down with a print book still has a place among the experiences of reading. A paper book will still work twenty years hence, and anytime you 
want it. Meanwhile, there is nothing better than books for lining the walls of your house.

19.  Geoffrey Nunberg, "Farewell to the Information Age," in The Future of the  Book,  ed.  Geoffrey  Nunberg  (Berkeley:  University  of  California  Press, 

1996), 103-138. The word information began to appear in the nineteenth century.

20.  Geoffrey C. Bowker, Memory Practices in the Sciences (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006), 29-31.
21.  Alberto Manguel, A History of Reading (London: Harper Collins, 1996), 191-192.
22.  See Alberto Manguel, The Library at Night (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2008).
23.  Or, according to "a set of rules that describe our reactions to technolo-gies" by the author of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy: "1. Anything that 
is in the world when you're born is normal and ordinary and is just a natural part of the way the world works. 2. Anything that's invented between when 
you're fifteen and thirty-five is new and exciting and revolutionary and you can probably get a career in it. 3. Anything invented after you're thirty-five is 
against the natural order of things." Douglas Adams, The Salmon of Doubt: Hitchhiking the Galaxy One Last Time (London: Macmillan, 2002), 95.

        |        1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²         
24.  Beth  Potier,  "Data  Overload  Nothing  New:  Too  Much  Information Has Vexed Scholars for Centuries," interview of Ann Blair, Harvard Gazette, 
February 13, 2003.
25.  Gottfried Leibniz, as quoted in Ann Blair, Too Much to Know: Managing Information before the Modern Age (New Haven, Yale University Press, 2010).

26.  See, for example, Katherine Elison, Fatal News: Reading and Information Overload in Early Eighteenth Century Literature (London: Routledge, 2006). 

"I find that 18th century experience with the proliferation of texts and expan-sion of its communication systems is unique in the history of media" (2).

27.  Elison, Fatal News.
28.  Jonathan Swift, "Tale of the Tub," as quoted in Nunberg, "Farewell to the Information Age."

29.  Andro  Linklater,  Measuring  America:  How  an  Untamed  Wilderness Shaped the United States and Fulfilled the Promise of Democracy (New York: 
Walker, 2002), 8-10. 
30.  By the late seventeenth century, information emerges as a concept, and almost immediately it is imagined as a physically and psychologically threatening entity, and once material and immaterial, capable of overwhelming the human body and intellect.

31.  Octave Mirabeau, as quoted in Ferguson, Paris as Revolution, 131.
32.  See Henkin, City Reading, for many vivid examples of nonbook text. 
33.  Brian Cowan, "Inventing the Coffee House" and "Penny Universities," in  The  Social  Life  of  Coffee:  The  Emergence  of  the  British  Coffeehouse  (New 

Haven:  Yale  University  Press,  2005),  79-112.  Word  searches  through  the diary Pepys kept from 1660 to 1669, now fully available online, don't turn 
up much on signage, streetscapes, handbills, posters, newspapers, or coffee-houses, for that matter, even though the first coffeehouses had appeared in 
London and Oxford well before then.
34.  Henkin, City Reading, 72.
35.  Henkin, City Reading, 70-75.
36.  Henkin, City Reading, ix.
37.  Ferguson, Paris as Revolution, 38-39.

  1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²               |        
38.  Carolyn Merchant, The Columbia Guide to American Environmental His-tory (New York: Columbia University Press, 2002), xiii.
39.  See David Hackett Fischer, Albion's Seed: Four British Folkways in Amer-ica (New York: Oxford University Press, 1989).
40.  Linklater, Measuring America, 160-175.
41.  David  Nye,  America  as  Second  Creation:  Technology  and  Narratives  of New Beginnings (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003), 1.

42.  Linklater,  Measuring  America,  13-17,  181,  on  the impact  of  Gunter's 66-foot chain as a standard in land surveying. 
43.  The distinction of broadcast radius persisted for at least half a century. In the days before public radio (NPR was not founded until 1970, by which 
time radio was often presumed dead), you could tell you were approaching New York by the rare sound of WQXR's classical music on your car radio.

44.  The  website  http://earlyradiohistory.us/  offers  many  essays  from  and about the period after World War I when radio became a civilian and commercial technology. They show the origins of such now essential notions as transmitting recorded music and personal wireless voice communication.

45.  See Bill Bishop, The Big Sort: Why the Clustering of Like-Minded America Is Tearing Us Apart (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2008).
46.  Klingman, Brandscapes, 65.
47.  John Brinkerhoff Jackson, American Space: The Centennial Years, 1865-1876 (New York: Norton, 1972), 30. "To be doing something where it had 

never been done before and in an altogether new manner--this was worth recording and celebrating" (30).

48.  "These [village lawns and centennial groves] survive to remind us of a nationwide movement to create a new kind of communal space, a more natural, more open environment; each was an anonymous testimonial for a love of American landscape." Jackson, American Space, 37.

49.  "In  an  age  like  our  own  where  sensitivity  to  environment  has  been exalted  to  the  status  of  virtue,  there  are  doubtless  many  features  of  those 
attempted  reforms  which  we  find  uncongenial:  a  reliance  on  mechanical solutions,  a  tendency  to  subdue  nature  rather  than  cooperate  with  it,  an 
unawareness of interaction instead of opposition between man and the world surrounding him" Jackson, American Space, 37.

        |        1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²         
50.  "The causes were several, but perhaps it can be said that for a variety of reasons the slum, instead of being popularly defined by the kind of people 
who lived there, was redefined by the kind of houses to be found there, by the environment." Jackson, American Space, 223.

51.  Economist  Herman  Daly  introduced  the  word  intrinsic  in  drawing  a fundamental, yet complementary contrast between instrumental and intrinsic forms of value. There exists, he asserted, an awareness that a continuum has value in itself. A forest need not be "land of many uses," but can be "for" 
nothing, and just exist.
52.  Richard Nisbett, The Geography of Thought: How Asians and Westerners Think Differently.!.!. And Why (New York: Free Press, 2003), 89-92, on the 

"focal fish" experiment.

 & K D S W H U   
1.  See  Adam  Markham,  A  Brief  History  of  Pollution  (London:  Earthscan, 1994).

2.  See www.darkskies.org.
3.  Amid the abandoned swaths of Detroit, artists have been putting up bill-board images of starlit skies.

4.  Peter Blake, God's Own Junkyard: The Planned Deterioration of America's Landscape (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1964), 69.
5.  Thomas Cusack Company v. City of Chicago, 242 U.S. 526 (1917).
6.  See John Jakle and Keith Sculle, Signs in America's Auto Age: Signatures of Landscape and Place (Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 2004).

7.  William K. Ewald and Daniel R. Mandelker, Street Graphics: A Concept and  a  System  (Washington,  DC:  American  Society  of  Landcape  Architects 

Foundation, 1971), a model municipal sign codes book.
8.  KCET  television  studios,  "Billboard  Confidential,"  October  9,  2008, http://www.kcet.org/shows/socal_connected/content/environment/billboards/. LA Weekly called these "billboard/supergraphic/major advertising/Blade  Runner  districts."  Many cities  have focused  their  efforts  on the  creation and governance of signage districts, even if in Los Angeles those inevita-bly bring comparisons with that iconic local tale, Blade Runner (1982).

  1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²               |        
9.  Wayne  Franklin,  foreword  to  Jakle  and  Sculle,  Signs  in  America's  Auto Age, xiv.
10.  "Outdoor  Advertising  Control  Language  Guide,"  www.fhwa.dot.gov/realestate/oacguide.htm.
11.  "The State of Electric Signage," www.signindustry.com.
12.  Shenk, Data Smog, 31.
13.  Norbert Wiener, The Human Use of Human Beings: Cybernetics and Soci-ety (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1950), 21-34.

14.  Cory Doctorow, "How Copyright Broke," in Content: Selected Essays on Technology,  Creativity,  Copyright,  and  the  Future  of  Future  (San  Francisco: 
Tachyon, 2008), 83-88. Available for free at http://craphound.com/content/download/.

15.  Tom  Hayes,  "Next  Up  for  the  Internet:  The  Attention  Rights  Move-ment,"  TomBomb.Com,  January  22,  2009,  http://tombomb.typepad.com/
tombomb/2009/01/next-up-for-the-internet-the-attention-rights-movement.html.
"Consider the following manifesto I am offering for the movement. Hard to disagree with these simple dignities:

*  I am the sole owner of my attention.

*  I have a right to compensation for my attention, value for value.

*  Demands on my attention shall be transparent.

*  I have a right to decide what information I want. And don't want.

*  I own my click stream and all other representations of my attention.

*  My email box is an extension of my person. No one has an intrinsic right to send me mail.

*  Attention theft is a crime."
16.  Hayes, "The Attention Rights Movement."
17.  Stephen Carter, Civility: Manners, Morals, and the Etiquette of Democracy (New York: Basic Books, 1998), 4-6. Carter opened with a parable of the 

shift  from  the  etiquette  of  transcontinental  railroad  travel,  when  "travelers understood  their  obligation  to  treat  each  other  well,"  and  when  etiquette 
guides were published and read, to the age of the private automobile, when "we travel both long and short distances surrounded by metal and glass and 

        |        1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²         
the illusion that  we are traveling  alone. The  illusion has seeped into every crevice of our public  and private  lives, persuading  us that sacrifices are no 
longer necessary" (4).
18.  Carter, Civility, 11.
19.  Carter, Civility 191-193.
20.  Charles  Ess,  "Floridi's  Philosophy  of  Information  and  Information Ethics:  Current  Perspectives,  Future  Directions,"  Information  Society  25 

(2009): 89-96.
21.  Luciano Floridi, "Foundations of Information Ethics," in Himma and Tavani, eds., The Handbook of Information and Computer Ethics, 12: "Entropy 

here refers to any kind of destruction, corruption, pollution, and depletion of informational objects (mind, not of information), that is, any form of impoverishment of being."
22.  Lewis Hyde, Common as Air: Revolution, Art, and Ownership (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2010), 44. Alas I started long before finding this, 

but now anyone who wants to think more about commons could hardly do better than to start here.

23.  Hyde, Common as Air, 38. See also Charlotte Hess and Elinor Ostrom, "Introduction: Overview of the Knowledge Commons," in Hess and Ostrom, 
eds., Understanding Knowledge as a Commons, 3-26.
24.  According to Blaise Pascal, "tyranny is the wish to obtain by one means what can only be had by another." As quoted in Hyde, Common as Air, 221.

25.  Elinor Ostrom, Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990), 7.

*  Clearly defined boundaries should be in place

*  Rules in use are well matched to needs and customs

*  Individuals affected by these rules can usually participate in modifying these rules

*  The right of community members to modify their own rules is respected by external authorities

*  A system for self-governing members' behavior has been established

*  A graduated system of sanctions is available

  1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²               |        

*  Community  members  have  access  to  low  cost  conflict  resolution mechanisms

*  Nested enterprises, that is, appropriation, provision, monitoring, sanc-tioning, conflict resolution, other governance activities--are organized in a 

nested structure with multiple layers of activities.
26.  Paul  Hawken,  Blessed  Unrest:  How  the  Largest  Movement  in  the  World Came into Being and Why No One Saw It Coming (New York: Viking Press, 

2007), 1, 2.
27.  David  Bollier,  "Growth  of  the  Commons  Paradigm,"  in  Hess  and Ostrom, eds., Understanding Knowledge as a Commons, 29.

28.    Hess  and  Ostrom,  "Introduction:  Overview  of  the  Knowledge  Com-mons," 4.
29.   For perhaps a distant but clear second to the visibility of Hardin's Trag-edy of the Commons, see Carol Rose, "Comedy of the Commons: Commerce, 
Custom and Inherently Public Property" (1986), reprinted as chapter 5 in her Property and Persuasion: Essays on the History, Theory and Rhetoric of Ownership (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1994), 105-162.
30.  Hyde, Common as Air, 235.
31.  Cory Doctorow, "Andy Warhol Is Turning in His Grave," (Manchester) Guardian, November 13, 2007, http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2007/

nov/13/pop.art.copyright. All twenty-some mentions of "commons" in Doc-torow's recent book-scale compilation, Content, are of creative commons.

32.  Ivan  Illich,  "Silence  Is  a  Commons."  CoEvolution  Quarterly,  Winter 1983, http://www.preservenet.com/theory/Illich/Silence.html.

33.  James Boyle, "The Second Enclosure Movement and the Construction of the Public Domain," Law and Contemporary Problems 66 (Winter-Spring 
2003): 33.
34.  Hyde, Common as Air, 110.

 & K D S W H U   
1.  Nick Bilton, i live in the future and here's how it works: why your world, work,  and  brain  are  being  creatively  disrupted  (New  York:  Crown,  2010), 

103-132, on "Suggestions and Swarms."

        |        1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²         
2.  See Winifred Gallagher, Rapt: Attention and the Focused Life (New York: Penguin Press, 2009), 189-202, for the relation of well being, neuroplasticity, and getting beyond industrial blase'.
3.  As of January 2012, "peak distraction" wasn't yet a meme. Indeed, very few uses were findable in a search.

4.  David  Henkin's  expression  "city  reading"  could  catch  on  here,  and  his method of studying everyday uses of printed information technology at street 
level might well work on the augmented city as well. 
5.  I am aware that these two very different halves of the book may seem in need of a keystone, but I think that keystone is something about sensibility 

and is therefore best left to each reader to imagine. This short "synopsis and retrospect" has declared why the two parts are here together. The hindsight 
that this chapter anticipates should reveal best how much of all this was true. 

 ( S L O R J X H
1.  Ivan  Illich,  "Silence  Is  a  Commons,"  Co-Evolution  Quarterly,  Winter 1983, 2, http://www.preservenet.com/theory/Illich/Silence.html.

2.  Illich, "Silence Is a Commons," 1.
3.  Sara Maitland, A Book of Silence (Berkeley: Counterpoint, 2008), 3.
4.  Maitland, A Book of Silence, 3.
5.  Maitland, A Book of Silence, 12.
6.  Arvo Pa"rt, as quoted  in Mark Prendergast, The  Ambient  Century: From Mahler to Trance: The Evolution of Sound in the Electronic Age, with a preface 

by Brian Eno (London: Bloomsbury Press, 2001), 95.
7.  Mother Teresa, as quoted in Carter, Civility, 289.
8.  Douglas Hofstadter, Go"del, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid (New York: Vintage Books, 1979), 156.

9.  "Cage had professed that his favorite music was when everything was still, when nothing was attempted. The very sounds of his everyday environment 
were `poetry to his ears.'" Prendergast, The Ambient Century, 1.
10.  See George Michelsen Foy, Zero Decibels: The Quest for Absolute Silence (New York: Scribners, 2010).

  1   2   7   (   6      7   2    3  $   *   (   6               ²               |        
11.   See chapters 3 and 4 for detailed arguments by and quotations of the Kaplans and others on attention restoration and effortless attention.
12.  Ken Burns, Dayton Duncan, et al., The National Parks: America's Best Idea, PBS, 2008.
13.  Garret Keizer, The Unwanted Noise of Everything We Want: A Book about Noise (New York: PublicAffairs, 2010), 179-188. Despite being wealthy and 
not just ordinary  Americans themselves,  members  of  the  "Wise use  move-ment" for motorized recreation cast their opponents as elitists. 

14.  Keizer, The  Unwanted Noise  of Everything We Want, 131-164, "Their World  Too,"  in  which  living  with  noise  has  become  a  widespread  social 
inequity.
15.  Keizer, The Unwanted Noise of Everything We Want, 65-66.
16.  Keizer, The Unwanted Noise of Everything We Want, 162.
17.  Keizer, The Unwanted Noise of Everything We Want, 15.
18.  Keizer, The Unwanted Noise of Everything We Want, 213. Since I have quoted so extensively from Keizer's wonderful book, let me clarify that I discovered it long after I had written drafts of this essay. The piece by Illich was the initial catalyst. Keizer has done a very good service, and I hope he likes 
this book too. 