Preface
Explanations, diversions, interpretations, polemics, songs, follies, and other unorganized bits !ll these pages, at least mostly. I do not claim de!nitive 
knowledge of Franc,ois Laruelle. I do not present this book as full and clear exposition  of Laruelle's  notoriously idiomatic  endeavor. This  is  not  an 
Introduction to Laruelle. I leave that task to others. Nor do these chapters try to enact the non- philosophical method. I leave that to Laruelle's army.

But there's love here, and more than a little fairy dust. Like many read-ers, I have tumbled deep down into the Laruellean abyss. It has taken a 
long time to reach the bottom, but every minute of it has been blissful, from the rigor and radicalism, to the profound ethical and monastic sensibility, to the unending commitment to immanence and materialism.Some newcomers to Laruelle turn tail and leave after only a few pages. 
There is little in his work to serve as a familiar anchor, particularly for those of us reared on critical theory and cultural studies. Laruelle is no 
"#$% radical like Guy Debord or Michel Foucault. He is not a public intel-lectual cast from the Sartrean mold like Alain Badiou. He does not practice phenomenology or dialectics, and he has little sympathy for today's reigning Hegelianism championed by the likes of Slavoj Zizek. His is not 
a familiar way of thinking. It's a genuinely weird way of thinking, a weirder thought.

Recall  Foucault's  quip  in  The  Order  of  Things  concerning  a  certain mys terious  Chinese encyclopedia: it's  possible  to  think  like  that?  With 
Laruelle  the  problem  grows  worse.  Why  would  you  ever  want  to  think that way?


xii  Preface

Still, there's a reason for all this weirdness. Laruelle has taken two of the most appealing traditions within Western thought, immanence and 
materialism-- the former found in philosophers like Baruch Spinoza and the  latter  in  thinkers  like  Karl  Marx  and  his  lineage-- and  has  driven 
them all the way to the end of the night. Many have attempted such an experiment, only to (unk before !nishing, as Laruelle is not shy about 
reminding  his  readers.  Deleuze  couldn't  manage  it;  Michel  Henry  got very close but also came up short. No one in fact, provided we believe 
Laruelle, has yet had the nerve to pursue the full rami!cations of imma-nence  and  materialism.  If  you  follow  that  path,  Laruelle  warns,  you'd 
better be ready to accept the consequences. The result is rather horri!c, to  be  sure,  as  the  individual  is  ripped  from  its  humdrum  routine  and 
inserted directly into the one. A blissful horror though, a pleasure in pain, a terror of letting go, an abnegation of the self in allegiance to a dark, 
dark universe.So there's love, but there's an argument here, too, divulged slowly if  
not always steadily throughout. Laruelle is an important thinker. Indeed, a Kant or a Heidegger or a Deleuze walks among us. My argument aims 
to  highlight  certain  tendencies  in  Laruelle's  overall  project,  tendencies labeled "univocal," "unidirectional," or "immanent"-- or to use less subtle  language,  "oblivious,"  "autistic,"  or  "prophylactic."  In  essence  I  sug- gest that we  must be rather simple- minded about the one, taking it at 
face value and combining it again with its binary companion, the zero,  in order to collide Laruelle with contemporary discourse on digitality. 
Laruelle almost never talks about the digital, it is true, yet I see evidence of the topic on almost every page. The goal is not to forge a new digital 
Laruelle,  but  on  the  contrary  to  show  how,  even  in  this  day  and  age, Laruelle remains a profoundly nondigital thinker, perhaps the only nondigital thinker we have.These last terms, though-- oblivious, autistic, prophylactic-- are controversial if not o)ensive to some, and are used here somewhat loosely. The one in Laruelle may appear neglectful, oblivious, even slightly sadistic. Yet this is no totalitarianism, no fascism, no Stalinism of the real. To be sure, Laruelle is docile as a lamb. Like Christ's kingdom (of the meek) 
or even Lenin's dictatorship (of the proletariat), the apparent oblivious totality of the one is only a quasi or false totality, precisely because it is a 
totality of insuficientcy. The one is never the Whole or the All, but rather 


  Preface  xiii
merely a !nite and generic one: this one; this one here; this one here in person. A dictatorship of the meek, therefore, need not be feared, even if 
it demands complete ful!llment. For this is the only method adequate, truly and actually, to pursue a rigorous immanence.

All  the  Spinozian  theorists  of  immanence  are  hawking  a  cake- and- eat- it- too duplicity, or so says Laruelle, because in (attening a formerly 
transcendental nature they merely proliferate di)erence. In righting one wrong they merely unloose a secondary corruption. Deleuzian mantras 
like "pure multiplicity across the plane of immanence" are simply non-sensical contradictions for Laruelle. Di)erence and immanence will never 
!nd common cause, because they are quite plainly opposites.In  fact,  Laruelle  will  propose  the  inverse  position,  that  immanence 
meshes best with commonality, not di)erence. Commonality and imma-nence mesh well because, according to Laruelle, the only kind of immanence  worth  talking  about  is  one  uncoupled  from  anything  di)erent from it, uncoupled even from itself (as a di)erent self).

Or  as  Carla  Lonzi  put  it  in  "#+,,  Let's  spit  on  Hegel.1  Here  is  where Deleuze and Laruelle agree: Hegel must be renounced; nothing good will 
ever come from something confronting its own alterity.2 This is why the one plays such a large role in Laruelle-- at times a maddeningly monotonous role-- because, again, if immanence is driven all the way to the end of the night, if indeed nothing good comes from the staging of self and 
other, then the only thing left is the non- di)erence of the one. A most merciful obliviousness, then: the universe is everything and I am nothing, but the universe emanates a glorious peace.Weird, yes, and more and more unfashionable today. How does Laruelle deviate from today's prevailing wisdom? Here are some characteriz-ing viewpoints, in no particular order, that will be unpacked further in the 
pages to come: Laruelle endorses identity of the same, not heterogeneity or di)erence; his non- standard method requires ascetic withdrawal, not 
the kind of self- realization associated with the "me generation" of post- "#$% philosophy; his ontology is rooted in a cryptography of being, not 
the more popular pornography of being (evident in the virtues of trans-parency, the strategies of capture, or the logics of aletheia); he requires a 
unilateral relation, not today's hegemony of multilateral ecologies of dif-ference (assemblages, rhizomes, networks). No wonder that Laruelle has 
been overlooked for so many years.

    13 26/08/2014   5:06:07 PM

xiv  Preface

The text is organized into ten chapters, bookended by an Introduc- tion and short Conclusion. The discussion progresses by way of header 
sentences  underscored  for  emphasis,  among  which  include  fourteen numbered  theses.  The  header  sentences  and  theses  are  meant  to  aid 
comprehension  by  outlining  the  arc  of  the  book  and  highlighting  its essential claims. Yet given the condensed nature of the headers and theses, it is necessary to elaborate on their meaning in normal prose, some-times at great length. Such constitutes the continuous body of the work.

We begin in the crypt and end at the altar. The crypt (the Introduction and chapter ") is the realm of the hidden, the secret, and the absolutely 
obscure.  Although  we  will  not  borrow  such  hiddenness  from  our  old friends Heidegger or Marx, that Heideggerian pathway toward a hidden 
truth that must be unconcealed, or those Marxian rational kernels that must be dragged out into the light of reason. Laruelle's crypt is a pure 
hiddenness, a secret that has never been divulged and never will.Beyond the crypt lies the world, the philosophical world, replete with 
processes like  reflection and di)erentiation. Chapters - and ., perhaps the  least  Laruellean  sections  of  the  book,  concern  themselves  chie(y 
with the philosophical world, exploring the various epithets of being in its rivenness and the larger forces of distinction and integration, dubbed 
here the "digital" and the "analog." Chapter / extends the discussion of the philosophical world by looking at the concept of the event. Typically 
understood as either relation or decision, the event in Laruelle takes on a very di)erent meaning, and we conclude Part I of the book considering 
the static, !nal, and preemptive nature of non- standard action.After dealing with the philosophical concept of digitality and its relation  to  Laruelle's  non- philosophy,  we  continue  in  Part  II  by  exploring two important aspects of actually existing digitality, computers and capitalism, with the goal of outlining some of the necessary conditions for withdrawing from the standard model of philosophy. Here the Laruelle- 
Deleuze relation will be tackled more directly by way of a specific sub-theme  existing  in  both  authors,  the  politics  and  aesthetics  of  control 
society, including computers and cybernetics. As for capitalism, the sur-prise is that there is no surprise, because Laruelle is a Marxist, and in that 
sense  quite  on  par  with  his  intellectual  compatriots  and  indeed  with those who concern themselves with "theory" broadly conceived. But as 
might be predicted, Laruelle's Marx is subjected to the non- philosophical 


  Preface  xv
method, leading in chapter $ to some rather interesting if not altogether unusual places, Louis Althusser for one.

Chapters + and % follow, both devoted to art and aesthetics. First, in chapter +, we consider the question of blackness and light. Then, in the 
following chapter, we sift through some of Laruelle's writings on !ne art with the hopes of de!ning a realist or non- standard aesthetics rooted in 
the concept of utopia.Having crawled out of the  crypt, we  !nd  ourselves at the  altar. The 
book concludes with twin chapters on the ethical and the generic, includ-ing Laruelle's views on persons in their humanity. A black mass, though, 
not a holy union; Laruelle's altar is just as dark and gloomy as the lowest levels of the most colorless crypt. Laruelle's ethical universe is a universe 
of strangers and victims, a generic humanity if not exactly a "bare life." As with the previous chapters on computers, Marxism, and art, Laruelle's 
vertiginous twists and turns begin to pay o) in the end, and the weird becomes wonderful.

What of non- philosophy as a whole? I am not pretending to be a Laru-ellean, nor do I necessarily aspire to promulgate the non- philosophical 
method and its attendant communities. The goal here is not to decamp to  the  shores  of  the  a  priori  universe.  But  at  the  same  time  I  have  no 
intention  of  absconding  with  Laruelle  and  forcing  him  at  gunpoint  to sing  the  recessional  as  non- philosophy  leaves  the  church.  To  kidnap 
Laruelle from non- philosophy is hardly feasible, much less desirable.Yet to abscond with the one; to reinsert Laruelle into discussions of 
the immanence of the one begun in Lucretius, Spinoza, Deleuze, or Henry; not so much to sow Laruelle with a di)erent seed, or to inseminate him 
with a mutant o)spring, as others might want to do; but to think Laruelle himself in terms of the generic; to fortify and extend his project in new 
ways; to consider the commonality of the one in terms of the commonal-ity of all being and thought; to withdraw from the long tradition of digital philosophy: these are activities worth pursuing.


!"#$%&'()%#*+)*+#,*'--.%-)/+%0-'*1%
i n t r o d u c t i o n
The Oldest Prejudice

"Inebriated and bastardized by Plato, liqui!ed and cogitated into concen-trate by Descartes, moralized by Kant, whipped by Sade, devoured by Hegel, 
disgorged by Stirner, conscripted by Husserl, chewed out by Nietzsche, down the wrong pipe of Derrida, turned over by Heidegger, crapped out 
by Deleuze, thrown up by Laruelle. And it would ask for more if we let it!"1With  this  litany,  Franc,ois  Laruelle  recounts  the  many crimes  of  the 
philosophers  caught  in  the  clutches  of  their  depraved  profession.  Phi-losophy is "the oldest prejudice."

2 To do philosophy means to harbor a 

secret stance toward the world-- pursuing it, eating and digesting it, beat-ing it down, then building it back up again. And philosophy itself is forever a glutton for punishment, eager to be reenlisted for future abuses. It will always come back for more if we let it.

This insatiable beast, can it be avoided? Is it possible to leave philoso-phy  behind,  to  abandon  the  prejudice?  Or  are  we  forever  caught  in  a 
vicious circle, where any stance taken against philosophy becomes recast as merely a new instance of intellectual  reflection, a di)erent kind of philosophical intervention? What if philosophy is the problem, not the solu-tion? What if the best response to philosophy is to cease doing it?

Laruelle is the most recent !gure to take these questions seriously, but certainly not the first. The chief aim of his life's work is to consider philosophy without resorting to philosophy in order to do so. His chief aim is to think philosophy unphilosophically.

Why  should  such  a  pedantic  exercise  matter  to  anyone  outside  the micro niche of professional philosophers? Is Laruelle simply a virtuoso 

Introduction
of the mind, performing intellectual back(ips and other feats of reason? Laruelle  had  been  writing  and  publishing  regularly  for  around  thirty 
years  before  his  first  book  was  translated  into  English.  What  would account for the sluggish pace of his reception both in France and abroad? 
Perhaps it is not clear to many readers what is at stake and why he should be viewed as anything other than a dazzling performer with equal parts 
acrobat and swashbuckler.Yet there are a number of reasons to be attracted to Laruelle above and 
beyond the seductive beauty of his idiosyncratic way of thinking. One might seek a theory of immanence more rigorous than those o)ered by 
Michel  Henry  or  Gilles  Deleuze.  One  might  be  schooled  in  medieval mysticism and seek a new kind of heretical thought appropriate to the 
modern condition. One might seek a nonrepresentational politics. One might seek a realist aesthetics. These are some of the many things that 
may be found in Laruelle.Although this book aims to address some of these topics, the ultimate 
focus here is slightly di)erent. I hope not simply to interpret Laruelle's existing paper trail, but further to collide Laruelle with a theme and context largely missing in his writings, the theme of digitality. If this project is successful it will o)er commentary and analysis relevant to a variety of 
issues cutting through a number of Laruelle texts, and at the same time provide a novel realization not explicitly evident in any of them.

Like philosophy, the digital is  also an insatiable beast, and like phi-losophy,  the  digital  is  also  inescapable  today.  Digital  machines  domi- 
nate  the  planet,  in  rich  and  poor  regions  alike,  while  so- called  digital thinking-- the binarisms of being and other or self and world-- is often 
synonymous  with  what  it  means  to  think  at  all.  By  piggybacking  on Laruelle's withdrawal from the philosophical decision, thereby discovering 
a non- standard real in parallel with philosophy, it also becomes possible to withdraw from the digital decision, likewise discovering a non- standard 
digitality in parallel with this one.To that end, this book has essentially two goals. The first is to de!ne 
digitality and demonstrate that philosophy and digitality share a special connection, no easy task to be sure. This will necessarily lure the discussion away from Laruelle proper, if only temporarily, as we investigate what digitality means and how it relates to philosophy as a whole. The second 
goal is to show that, given his withdrawal from philosophy, Laruelle too withdraws from the digital. In other words, if philosophy and the digital are structured in similar ways, then to decline to participate in philosophy means to decline to participate in digitality.How could it be possible that philosophy and digitality are the same 
thing? The question will be engaged more fully in the  first part of the book, but the crux of the matter is that philosophy is rooted in distinction. Whether the metaphysical distinction between essence and instance or the political distinction between friend and foe, philosophy relies on 
opposition,  reflection, or relation between two or more elements. Like-wise, digitality entails a basic distinction, whether zeros and ones or some 
other set of discrete units-- the four nucleobases of the genetic code or the twenty- six letters of the alphabet are just as digital as the base- two 
numeric encoding used in binary computers. Any digital medium will have a bed of genetically distinct elements. These elements form a homogeneous substrate from which constructions are built.But for Laruelle's non- standard method, distinction no longer holds sway, at least not in the way distinction has been classically de!ned. So just as he withdraws from the philosophical decision, Laruelle implicitly 
withdraws from the digital decision. Just as he bars distinction in favor of the single determining instance of "the One," Laruelle leaves any possibility of zeros and ones behind because he bars the essential condition of  discriminating  between  the  two  elements  in  the  first  place.  (Again, 
zeros  and  ones have  a nice  heuristic  utility, and  they will  be  deployed throughout the book, but any base mechanism for encoding value distinctions would serve equally well-- the alphabet, the genetic code, and so on.)

Because of this, the present volume does not address digitality in terms of computers, software, the Web, or other kinds of existing digital technologies, as I have done in other writings. As counterintuitive as it may seem at first glance, this book examines digitality largely uncoupled from 
any  sort  of  immediate  technological  referent.  Instead  we  treat  digital- ity  as  a  strictly  theoretical  concept.  It's  not  that  computers  have  been 
mistakenly omitted  from the  argument. This  apparent omission  is  the argument itself.

Thesis I. Definition of the media principle: the real is communicational, and the communicational is real. Before tackling philosophy and digitality directly, let us open the investigation into Laruelle by looking in some detail at a short essay titled "The Truth according to Hermes: Theorems 
on the Secret and Communication," first published in French in "#%+.3 I select this short essay not so much because it addresses non- philosophy 
as  a  whole but  because  it stands  nicely  on  its  own,  is  readily  available online,  and  engages  a  kind  of  vocabulary-- secrecy,  communication, 
interpretation-- that should be familiar to many even if they are unfamil-iar with Laruelle.

What is Laruelle's general approach? To start, consider Laruelle's inter-est in radical immanence, illustrated in this text by a "pure" Hermes, that 
is, a Hermes unsullied  by the  sallies and wanderings  of hermeneutics. Laruelle's Hermes is a non- Hermes, one who touches the truth as such, 
without  any  threat  of  deceit  in  exchange,  without  any  metaphysical depth, and without the fog of semantic transfer. Laruelle's goal is to cut 
through the relational thinking associated with hermeneutics that forever breaks truth in half as truth and its communication or the secret and its 
manifestation. We must instead "let the philosophers in on the secret," so that they may pursue a rigorous science of truth.

"The  unitary  or  dominant  way  of  thinking  is  that  of  a  generalized hermeneutics" (page "#, thesis "), writes Laruelle at the  opening of the 
essay. But what is a generalized hermeneutics? It is an "indissoluble cor-relation."  It  is  "the  undecidable  coupling  of  truth  and  its  communica- 
tion" (page "#, thesis "). In this way truth never simply stands on its own, because it always exists in a relationship of givenness vis- a`- vis a human 
agent. The relationship of givenness is one in which truth is given over to humankind  and  made  available  for  its  consumption.  It  matters  little 
whether truth is hidden or revealed. What matters is that truth is always already given over in advance to the possibility of being hidden or revealed. Similar to what Quentin Meillassoux has termed "correlationism," Laruelle describes a scenario in which truth as such is only ever given 
over to a receptive perceiver.4If  we  were  to  extract  a  "media  principle"  from  Laruelle  it  might  be 
something like what he says in thesis "$ of the Hermes article: "The real is communicational, the communicational is real" (page --, thesis "$). 
Such is the classical model of mediatic being handed down from antiq-uity and still prevalent today-- handed down here as Hermes, the god of, 
among other things, transport into and out of foreign places.

Conceptions of mediatic being run deep in Western philosophy. They are evident in metaphysical models. They are evident in how we think 
about interpretation and communication. They structure the basic rela-tionship  between  Being  and  Dasein,  or  "being- there,"  the  uniquely 
human  mode  of  being  described  in  Heidegger.  Hermes  is  the  patron saint of  mediatic  being, a scenario  in which something far  away must  
be  given over  to  something close  at hand that becomes attentive to it. Hermes is the chaperone of travelers in foreign lands; the god of markets 
and merchants too, for they and their goods travel abroad just like the traveler. Hermes sits at the door hinge, for he is the god of thresholds. He 
gives his name to the art of literary interpretation, hermeneutics, for he is the god of translating what is obscure into what is known.

But to Laruelle this is all merely a picture of the "unitary and authori-tarian"  Hermes.  Such  a  commonplace  Hermes  must  be  replaced  by  a 
non- philosophical one, a Hermes who does not take the correlationist bait. Thus Laruelle's Hermes

de!nes the essence of truth as a secret, but as a secret that in order to exist 
and to be made known needs none of the light of logos, none of the tricks 
of meaning, the strategies of interpretation, the horizons of the World, or 
the transcendent forms of appearance. Truth as secret exists autonomously 
prior to the horizontality of appearance. The secret enjoys an absolute precedence over interpretation; it is itself the Uninterpretable. (page -,, thesis /)

Alienation, translation, interpretation,  reflection-- these many vectors of the human mind are all steadfastly resisted by Laruelle. In our vanity 
we consider reason and logic to act in this way because we act in this way. But Laruelle is resolutely against such a narcissistic "we." His is a strong 
anti- phenomenology. That is to say, his is the rejection of any scenario in which a world or a thing is revealed to a solicitous subject. If Meillassoux 
opposes himself to  correlationism in the hope of arriving at the abso- lute possibilities for thought and thus eventually for real matter, Laruelle 
opposes himself to correlationism in the hope of arriving at a !nite and generic reason, itself existing in a superpositional matrix in the real. In any 
case, both thinkers wish to remove the normal human perceiver from the  equation,  because  the  human  is  considered  to  be  a  limiting  factor 
vis- a`- vis what may be known about the real.

What remains is pure essence, generic immanence. Laruelle's generic never enacts the media principle by propagating itself, and likewise his 
immanence is so entirely immanent to itself that it becomes generic or common (at best a quasi- propagation). "The secret is the strictly un reflected upon form of truth that, given to itself, gives nothing of itself and receives nothing of itself except the modality in which it is given" (page 
-,, thesis 0). Like data encryption, the secret admits nothing, except for the fact of it being communicated. Such a condition is named "the One" 
by Laruelle. Sometimes he o)ers alternative synonyms for the One: the "Indivision," the "Without- Division," or the "Non- interpretable."

But this "One" is not in!nite; it is not simply another name for God or the absolute. Entities in their generic immanence are still simply entities. 

Hence Laruelle labels these entities !nite rather than in!nite. "The secret is truth when it no longer needs to go out of itself and be for itself, when 
it is itself by staying in itself " (page -,, thesis $). Such truth is !nite in its immanent oneness.

Laruelle's is a Hermes as science, not a Hermes as art. The old "herme-neuts"  of  philosophy  or  literary  interpretation  are  like  astronauts  or 
argonauts; these are people who travel, with Hermes at their elbow, to a foreign  place.  Laruelle  dismissively  calls  philosophers  the  mere  "mailmen of truth" (page --, thesis "$). He subtracts the mailman from the equation, reaching directly through this mediating individual to touch 
Hermes himself. The secret "never reaches a consciousness, or vanishes when  it  does"  (page  -,,  thesis  $).  Removing  the  extra  (u)  of  human 
mediation is necessary to break the philosophical circle, and ultimately to engage in the practice of non- standard philosophy.

The stakes are exceptionally high in such an endeavor, and we may now begin to catalogue the many enemies of Laruelle, the many traditions strewn by the wayside. Of course, hermeneutics is out, but so too are phenomenology and dialectics, because they also follow the media principle to the extent that they require mediative propagation via relation.Listen to the direct assault on Heidegger and phenomenology in the 
following quotation: "To meditate on the essence of Being, on the forget-ting of Being, is a task that has lost its sense of urgency" (page -", thesis ",).
 

Or here, the assault on Barthes, Derrida, and the other post- structuralists: "The essence of the secret knows nothing of the play of veiling and unveiling, of the structure of di)erence in general" (page -", thesis #).

Shunning these philosophical traditions, Laruelle has essentially barred himself from entry into the intellectual currents of the twentieth century. 
What else was there among his potential confreres that was not dialec-tics, or phenomenology, or hermeneutics? All are taken o) the table: Hegel, 
Marx,  Nietzsche,  Freud,  Saussure,  Husserl,  Heidegger,  Sartre,  Cixous, Derrida, Kristeva, Barthes, Malabou. All that is left is a curious kind of 
immanence. It is natural, then, that Laruelle would have found a com-rade, however remote, in Deleuze.

Yet Laruelle does not exactly reject these other !gures. He recognizes and validates all hitherto existing philosophy. To be precise, Laruelle has 
no  interest in  overturning, rejecting,  denying,  or overcoming  philoso-phy, and he never uses such language. (On this score, we should be clear 
that the Against . . . of my title is not entirely Laruellean.) Rather, in his parlance, such work becomes the "material" for non- philosophy. Laruelle's 
non- standard  approach  wishes  merely  to  "clone"  existing  philosophy, and in so doing to discover the immanent identity of thought and reality 
residing within philosophy.Laruelle illustrates what it means to do non- philosophy in theses "" 
and "- of the Hermes essay. Non- philosophy means, essentially, to select an  existing  philosophical  system,  hermeneutics  say,  and  to  analyze  it 
exclusively  for  the  generic  logics  that  exist  within  it.  These  logics  are what remain once the human, the person who decides to do philosophy, 
is removed. Thus even hermeneutics has a non- philosophical core, for it must propose something like an "absolute or !nite experience of truth" 
(page -", thesis "") if it ever is able to meditate on the intractable di*cul-ties of getting at such a truth (via interpretation or other methods). Even 
if it adamantly refuses that such a truth is graspable, it has proposed it, if only in silhouette.

The non- philosopher, then, enters the scene, removes the human deci-sion to  reflect, and rescues the logic of the situation that remains. If "truth" 
is the scene, and the communication of truth is removed, then what is rescued is the generic immanence of a secret truth that has been revealed 
to no living person.Return to the age- old question, If a tree falls in the forest when no one 
is around, does it make a sound? For Laruelle, all trees only ever fall in forests where no one is around, and they always make a sound.

The philosophical decision and the principle of su"cient philosophy. We begin with Laruelle's short essay on Hermes because it presents in miniature all that is important in Laruelle. Let us continue now on to bigger things and explain how this small essay intersects with some of the larger 
concepts in his work.First and foremost, non- philosophy hinges on a withdrawal of what 
Laruelle calls "the philosophical decision." To engage in the philosophical decision is to endorse the position that anything and everything is a candidate for philosophical  reflection. Thus to do philosophy means to  reflect on the world, and likewise, if one is being philosophical, one is necessarily also being  reflective  or metaphilosophical. (For Laruelle philosophy means primarily Western philosophy, and he tends to rely on examples 
from the continental tradition, such as Hegel, Nietzsche, and Derrida.)Non- philosophy means simply to decline to engage in such a decision. 
In  other  words,  non- philosophy  declines  to  reflect  on  things.  Non- philosophy  withdraws  from  the  decision  (to   reflect  on  things),  and  in 
doing so enters into a space of what Laruelle calls "theory" or "science." From this place "alongside" philosophy, non- philosophy is able to take 
philosophy as its raw material, extracting from it various kinds of pure, non reflected, autonomous, and radically immanent logics.

Although Laruelle's conception of the term science might be confusing-- not to mention his late fascination with algebra, quantum mechanics, and imaginary numbers-- it is perhaps best understood in terms of the  distinction  between  immanence  and  transcendence.  For  Laruelle, 
philosophy means roughly "the thing that is transcendental vis- a`- vis the real." Taken in this sense philosophy is always representational,  reflective, 
or mediated. Philosophy reveals the conditions of possibility of things (but not those things themselves).

By contrast science means roughly "the thing that is immanent vis- a`- vis the real." Science is always direct or radical, not  reflective or mediated. 
Science  reveals  things  immediately,  unilaterally,  and  unconditionally. Thus when Laruelle refers to non- philosophy as a science of philosophy 
he  means  simply  that  it  focuses  on  philosophy's  radical  or  ir reflective immanence, not its penchant for the transcendental.

(Such a distinction also helps categorize Laruelle's two most signi!cant methodological  volumes: the  first, Principles of  Non- philosophy ["##$],  
is  Laruelle's  attempt  to  articulate  a  non- standard  philosophy,  while  the second, Non- standard Philosophy [-,",], is Laruelle's attempt to articu-late a non- standard science, for which the chief representative is quantum 

mechanics.8) As John Mullarkey describes it, Laruelle is "abstaining from philosophy as such while simultaneously taking it as its own raw material."9 The goal of non- philosophy is a rigorous theoretical knowledge of or in philosophy. Although even the word of becomes problematic for Laruelle, because through the structure of language it posits a relationship between 
two  things-- something  is  of  something  else.  For  this  reason  Laruelle  will often quarantine the word by rendering it in parentheses, as with the 
term "force (of) thought."In  this  sense,  non- philosophy,  being  a  science  and  not  a  philosophy,  does  not   reflect  back  on  itself.  Laruelle  is  quite  adamant  on  this point, repeating and clarifying it in almost everything he writes. Non- 
philosophy is not circular vis- a- vis philosophy, and thus there is nothing meta about it. Rather, according to Laruelle, non- philosophy is scientific and axiomatic.The philosophical decision also goes by a second name in Laruelle, 
the  principle  of  su"cient  philosophy. Similar  in  form to  Leibniz's  prin-ciple  of  sufficient  reason,  which  states  that  everything  happening  in  
the  world happens  for a specific reason-- Whitehead's slight modi!ca-tion of the principle is elegant in its simplicity, "No actual entity, then no 
reason"-- the principle of sufficient philosophy states that for everything in the world there must be a philosophy oriented toward it and bent on 
explaining and unpacking it. The principle of sufficient philosophy thus implicitly asserts that philosophy is an autonomous !eld, and that philosophy has the privilege and ability to tackle any subject whatsoever.The subtext here is that Laruelle considers philosophy to be essentially 
a narcissistic enterprise, in that it turns the real world back on itself into the shape of something that can be looked at,  reflected upon, absorbed 
in, and given over to mankind so it can be solicitous toward it. Laruelle abstains from conventional discussions of dialectics, causality, and representation, but it is clearly the phenomenological scene that he avoids the most and that he most closely associates with the practice 
of doing philosophy. As the phenomenologists like to say, The world is given to us so we can think about it. But nearly everything in Laruelle is designed in order to avoid making such a claim.

Instead of a notion of ontology as the relationship between Being and existing,  as  the  relationship  between  reality  and  its  own  communication, Laruelle speaks of the one as the real that is radically autonomous. Thus something like Catherine Malabou's basic plasticity of Being would 
be anathema to Laruelle, who would cast o) Malabou as nothing more than the same philosophical tricks.

10 There is no low-level convertibility between the one and Being for Laruelle. The one is precisely the noncon-vertible,  the  non- morphable.  The  one  has  no  relationship  to  anything else.  In  general  Laruelle  abstains  from  any  kind  of  logics  that  require reciprocity, reversibility, or exchange.

Traditional notions of causality must therefore be scrapped, because they typically imply a causality of two directions (as action/reaction, dialectical contradiction, and so on), even if we make allowances for the "frustrated" bidirectionalities of post- structuralism. Instead Laruelle's the ory of causality is a strong unidirectional causality, for which he borrows the Marxian label determination- in- the- last- instance (DLI). Determinationin- the- last- instance is Laruelle's replacement for all the hitherto existing de!nitions of causality. The only causality proper to the one is a unidirectional and rigorously irreversible causality.Causality is therefore given a new name in Laruelle. It is called "cloning," because cloning is a kind of logic that produces a dual entity through an identical copy. But the clone parent and the clone child never need 
establish a relationship with each other, and hence nothing is produced or  synthesized  during  the  act  of  cloning.  The  clone  is  thus  a  "duality 
which is an identity but an identity which is not a synthesis."11 (Note that "dual" is acceptable to Laruelle, but he throws out concepts like pair or 
binarism. Dual is acceptable because it provides an avenue for thinking about two- ness without resorting to relationship.)

This  also  helps  understand  why  Laruelle's  "One"  is  not  at  all  meta-physical in nature. The one is absolutely foreclosed to the clone, yet the 
clone as copy is entirely dependent on the one. Thus the one exerts total determination  over  the  clone  (determination- in- the- last- instance),  yet 
is at the same time absolutely oblivious of the clone and therefore in a nonrelation with it.

Laruelle calls this a "unilateral duality." It is unilateral because the one, in its absolute totality, is never in a relationship with anything, and hence 
operates  unilaterally.  (If  the  one  were  merely  one  "side"  pitted  against 
another "side" we would be required to speak in terms of a bilateral relationship;  but  this  is  never  the  case  in  Laruelle.  The  one  never  takes  a 
side.) Likewise it is also a duality, because the clone is a dual of the one, running "alongside" it or "according to" it. Laruelle's duality is thus never 
a  two, or a  pair,  or  a  binarism,  or  an  opposition.  Binarisms  exist  only between like categories, between categorical equals; the one is not equal 
to anything, it is equality itself in the most radical sense. There can be no parity with the one, only the duality of a clone.

Materialism. Laruelle was labeled a materialist already in the preface to this book, but why exactly? Laruelle is indeed critical of the philosophical  school  known  as  materialism,  just  as  he  is  critical  of  the  contrary notion, idealism, along with realism and other philosophical positions. 
Of  course,  these  terms  are  somewhat  fungible  and  take  on  di)erent meanings in di)erent contexts. The term materialism is used here as a 
marker for a certain kind of thinking that refuses the primacy of idealist philosophy and transcendental metaphysics. Such a materialism refers 
to that special cocktail of empiricism, realism, and materialism in which may be found !gures like Marx, Deleuze, Heraclitus, Lucretius, Spinoza, 
Hume, Bergson, or Whitehead.To be clear, Laruelle's non- philosophy is neither a materialism nor a 
realism in the most narrow sense of the terms. He makes this evident on countless occasions, practically on every page. Although a*liated with 
materialist  philosophy  and  particularly  the  historical  materialism  of Marx, Laruelle's conception of the real is not simply reducible to a kind 
of  primary  matter  or  empirical  reality.  He  has  no  interest  in  debating whether or not the real world exists outside our ability to observe it, or 
whether or not the real world is constructed out of countless small mate-rial atoms. These are the squabbles of philosophy, after all. The real, as 
non- philosophical, is de!ned precisely and axiomatically by Laruelle. The real is the unilateral duality specific to an immanent one.

These caveats aside, and Laruelle's frequent use of the term real not-withstanding, I refer to Laruelle's project as a materialism throughout. 
This is not meant to mislabel Laruelle or sideline realism, but simply to indicate a larger set of concerns including immanence, anti- philosophy, 
historical materialism, determination- in- the- last- instance, generic human-ity, critique of representation, critique of metaphysics, political militancy, ethical finitude, and so on. In my view the label materialism is ultimately the best way to describe the confluence of these various issues.

Indeed Laruelle is a materialist in a very basic sense, and he admits  as much all throughout his work. First, despite a gargantuan and often 
onerous  sca)olding  of  terms  and  concepts,  Laruelle  puts  great  stock  in !nite materiality, what the French call vecu, or lived experience. Just  
as Heidegger relies heavily on the concept of Dasein, the uniquely human experience of  being  in the  world, Laruelle  spends  a great deal of time 
thinking  about  the  real  material  experience  of  human  life.  Second,  Laruelle is something of an unrepentant Marxist and adopts a number  
of  theo retical  principles  from  the  tradition  of  historical  materialism, including the concepts of the determination of the material base and the 
relation between forces of production and relations of production. Third, Laruelle builds the entire concept of matter and material into the non- 
philosophical method, such that the philosophical corpus serves as the raw material for non- philosophical investigation, a kind of empirical base, 
if you will, for theoretical inquiry. And !nally, although there are many !ne- grained distinctions that one might draw between realism and materialism, Laruelle's a)ection for the real, in particular his de!nition of the real in terms of generic insufficient finitude, could be read as an illustration of his materialist tendencies.As for idealism, certainly there's no room in Laruelle for those stalwart  idealist  conceptions  of  in!nity,  abstraction,  essence,  or  universal spirit. In fact Laruelle and his friend Michel Henry form a perfect mirror:  both  being  theorists  of  radical  immanence,  Henry  !nds  the  ulti- mate  condition of immanence in  spirit, mind, and  self, while Laruelle 
!nds it in the real, the material, and the generic experience of human  life.

The digital and the analog; analysis and synthesis. Since the remainder of  this  book  freely  employs  the  twin  concepts  of  digital  and  analog,  a 
word  or  two  of  introduction  is  required  before  getting  underway.  My view on these terms will be idiosyncratic to some, yet I believe my de!nitions are precise enough to generate a useful conversation. Indeed the conversation will begin only after the long arc of the book is complete.

There are many ways to de!ne the digital and the analog. The digital is online, the analog is o1ine. The digital is new, the analog old. The dig ital 

    28 26/08/2014   5:06:07 PM

  Introduction  xxix
means zeros and ones, the analog means continuous variation. The digi-tal means discrete, the analog means integrated. The digital means the 
digits  (the  !ngers  and  toes),  the  analog  means  proportion  (ratios  and correspondences).

Here the terms do not mean precisely these things. Here they delin-eate the broken and the smooth, the di)erence between discrete points 
and  continuous  curves.  But  even  this  forestalls  the  question:  claiming "discrete points" explains little, because nothing has been said as to how 
such points became discrete in the first place. So the digital is something more fundamental. The digital is the basic distinction that makes it possible to make any distinction at all. The digital is the capacity to divide things and make distinctions between them. Thus not so much zero and 
one, but one and two.12In chapter ., the chapter in which the digital and analog are examined 
most closely, the digital is de!ned as "the one dividing in two," while the analog is de!ned as "the two coming together as one." As the one dividing in two, the digital describes processes of distinction or decision. Both distinction  and  decision  involve  the  separation  of a  formerly  indistinguishable mass into separate lumps. To decide means to choose, but it also  means  that  the  choice  has  been  rendered  into  discrete  paths  that 
may be chosen. Likewise, distinction means to di)erentiate between for-merly  indistinguishable  things,  prompting  variations  and  contrasts  to 
become evident.By contrast, the analog, as the two coming together as one, describes 
processes of integration or proportion. The analog brings together het-erogenous elements into identity, producing a relation of nondistinction. 
Twoness  is  overcome  by  oneness;  the  transcendental  is  overcome  by immanence.

These two expressions-- "the one dividing in two" and "the two com-ing together as one"-- have a storied past in postwar France, particularly 
in  the  wake  of  Louis  Althusser.  The  expressions  harken  back  to  Mao, Lenin, Marx, and even Hegel, who used them to typify the two moments 
of the dialectic, the moment of analysis, where the one divides in two, and the moment of synthesis, where the two combines as one.

For his part, Hegel, while allowing for both distinction and integration, ultimately  stresses  the  overcoming  of  alienation  via  synthesis  (- 

! "). History is an epic of synthesis in the work of Hegel. Contradictions can 

    29 26/08/2014   5:06:07 PM

xxx  Introduction
and will appear, but only so they may be reintegrated into the whole. But if  Hegel  viewed  history  as  an  epic  synthesis,  Lenin,  following  Marx, 
viewed history as an epic struggle. Analysis, not synthesis, takes center stage  in  Marxism  and  Leninism,  as  commodities  are  demysti!ed  into 
shells and kernels, society is disintegrated into factional classes, and the union of the common, while perhaps achieved in certain ways, remains 
ever  elusive. As  Lenin  famously wrote, the essence of dialectics lies in analysis (" 

! -), that is, the division of the whole into its parts, which in fairness he attributed to Hegel as much as to Marx.

13

What is the essence of the dialectic? Is it analysis, synthesis, or both together? In his book about the art and politics of the twentieth century, 

Alain Badiou recalls one of the classic mid- century debates concerning the digital distinction between one and two:

Around "#$0 there begins in China what the local press-- ever inventive 
when it came to the designation of con(icts-- calls "a great class struggle in 
the !eld of philosophy." On one side stand those who think that the essence 
of dialectics is the genesis of antagonism, and that it is given in the formula 
"one divides into two"; on the other, those who argue that the essence of 
dialectics is the synthesis of contradictory terms, and that consequently 
the right formula is "two fuse into one." The apparent scholasticism harbours an essential truth. For what is really at stake is the identi!cation of 
revolutionary subjectivity, of its constituent desire. Is it a desire for division, for war, or is it instead a desire for fusion, for unity, for peace? In any 
case, in China at that time those who espouse the maxim "one divides into 
two" are declared "leftists," while those who advocate "two fuse into one" 
are called "rightists."14

A*rming Lenin's interest in contradiction and struggle, Mao expressed his preference for the analytic motion of the dialectic, the motion of the 
one- to- two, in various statements. The world teems with contradiction and it calls out for analysis, he said in a "#0+ speech:

There is no place where contradictions do not exist, nor is there any person 
who cannot be analysed. To think that he cannot is being metaphysical. . . . 
As a matter of fact, the secretaries of our Party branches understand dialectics, for when they prepare reports to branch meetings, they usually write 

    30 26/08/2014   5:06:08 PM

  Introduction  xxxi

down two items in their notebooks, first, the achievements and, second, 
the shortcomings. One divides into two-- this is a universal phenomenon, 
and this is dialectics.15

In  "#$.  the  international  communist  movement  split  longitudinally into  two  basic wings,  the  Soviet  and  the  Chinese,  and  under  Mao  the 
analysis- synthesis debate was recontextualized along the China- Soviet axis.  Those  who  endorsed  coexistence  with  the  Soviets  endorsed  the 
"analog" moment of synthesis (- ! "), while those who endorsed distinc-tion from the Soviets and a continued revolution within China, the Cultural Revolution that would arrive only a few years later, endorsed the "digital" moment of analysis (" 

! -).Already heated, the debate grew more furious after a lecture given in 

November "#$. by Yang Xianzhen, a Chinese philosopher and member of the Central Committee, ideas from which were reproduced by two of 
his students, Ai Hengwu and Lin Qingshan, and published in the Beijing newspaper Guangming Daily on May -#, "#$/, under the title "`Dividing 
One into Two' and `Combining Two into One': Some Realization Gained in the Study of Chairman Mao's Thought in Materialistic Dialectics." In 
the article Ai and Lin found value in the two movements of the dialectic, in both division and combination. Yet they committed a mistake in the 
eyes  of  certain  of  their  comrades  by  placing  such  an  emphasis  on  the second moment, the combining of two into one:

The action and reaction between bodies are "combined from two into one" 
to become the mechanical motion of bodies. The attraction and repulsion 
between  molecules  inside  bodies  are  "combined  from  two  into  one"  to 
constitute  physical  motion.  The  combination  and  dissociation  of  atoms 
are  "combined  from  two  into  one"  to  constitute  chemical  motion.  The 
assimilation and dissimilation of protein organic bodies which are formed 
with  carbon,  hydrogen,  oxygen  and  nitrogen  among  the  chemical  elements are "combined from two into one" to constitute the vital motion of 
metabolism.  The  productive  forces  and  the  relations  of  production,  the 
economic foundation and the superstructure are "combined from two into 
one" to constitute the cognitional motion of mankind. . . . From all kinds 
of natural phenomena to human society, thinking, etc., there is nothing 
which is not a case of "combining two into one."16

    31 26/08/2014   5:06:08 PM

xxxii  Introduction

A week later Hsiang Ch'ing published a rebuttal bearing the unambig-uous title "`Combining Two into One' Is Not Dialectics," and the debate 
was on. One camp used two- to- one (analog) as a way to push for peace-ful coexistence, while the other camp used one- to- two (digital) as a way 
to push for a more permanent class struggle.By the next year Yang's synthesis of two- to- one had been thoroughly 
renounced by Mao and his adherents in the analysis camp; by "#$$ Yang was in jail. The results were clear: division would be favored over combination, analysis over synthesis, digital over analog.The identi!cation of such a great class struggle in the !eld of philosophy has been an inspiration to many in recent decades, particularly in the context of postwar French thought; not only Badiou, but also Guy 
Debord, Pierre Macherey, and others including Bruno Bosteels, Alenka Zupanc^ic^,  and  most  recently  Michael  Hardt  and  Antonio  Negri,  who 
during the conclusion of their Empire trilogy !nd cause to discuss how and why "the one divides into two."

17

These thinkers do not all agree by any means, yet contra Hegel and subsequent to Marx,  Lenin,  and Mao, a new normal  had  more  or less 

been established in the late twentieth century: to be political means to favor distinction over integration, struggle over coexistence. Those advocating the integrity of the whole are labeled bourgeois and reactionary, while those advocating the disintegration of existing relations are labeled 
revolutionary and progressive."Truth  is  what  has  no  identity  other  than  from  a  di#erence,"  wrote 
Badiou, "hence the being of all things is the process of its division into two."

18 Or as Hardt and Negri unambiguously put it, "The old three- part 

dialectic, which would make a unity of the two con(icting subjectivities, will no longer work. Its claims of unity and integration at this point are 

just false promises."19Yet while a consensus had emerged around division, opinion was certainly  not  universal  on  this  point.  Mao's  "One  becomes  two,"  wrote Deleuze and Guattari near the start of A Thousand Plateaus, describes the 
sad e)orts of "the most classical and well  reflected, oldest, and weariest kind of thought."

20 Indeed for Deleuze and Guattari, contra the Maoist 

and Leninist tradition, digitality is the oldest kind of thought, the oldest prejudice,  because  it  requires  a  decision  made  between  two  elements  

forever held apart in distinction. These elements may be zeros and ones, 

    32 26/08/2014   5:06:08 PM

  Introduction  xxxiii
as  with  the  binary  mathematics  driving  modern  computers.  But  they may also be any number of other things, such as the binary pairs of man 
and woman, self and other, industrialist and proletariat, or essence and instance.

For Deleuze and Guattari both versions of the mechanism of distinc-tion are equally unappealing, whether the one dividing in two or the two 
fusing into one. (Hence their nomination of the rhizome as an alterna-tive to all trees, roots, and radicals, the rhizome as a form of propagation 
irreducible to both division and fusion.) Yet although they have little use for the dialectic, Deleuze and Guattari were fully committed to multiplicity, not so much Mao's teeming contradictions but something closer to the proliferation of di)erence. Spinoza's immanence of nature provided 
the necessary path to retain both the unity of things and their endless di)erentiation. And thus with the Spinozists comes the grand compromise of immanence: pure multiplicity within the univocity of being. In other words, what exists is digital, but what exists is analog.

Yet today there exists an alternative option, irreducible to the synthe-ses  of  Hegel,  the  struggles  of  Mao,  or  Deleuze's  grand  compromise  of 
immanence.  Enter  Laruelle  and  the  grand  non- compromise  of  imma-nence, de!ned by him in terms of the generic finitude of the one. Instead 
of arguing analysis or synthesis, one- in- two or two- in- one, digitality or analogicity, pro or con, Laruelle pleads indecision and exits the vicious 

circle entirely.And so, given Laruelle's abstention from the decision of philosophy, 
any examination of his work will necessarily involve an examination of analysis, division, distinction, and indeed digitality. Although computers 
and  the  online  world  are  not  central  in  his  work,  the  digital  itself  is indeed central, particularly if the digital is de!ned in a more capacious 
sense than merely the electronic machines and networks of millennial life.

21

The digital is, in crass terms, Laruelle's chief enemy. His nonparticipa-tion in the analysis- synthesis debate is a nonparticipation in the digital. 

His abstaining from binary relation is an abstention from the digital. His withdrawal from decision is a withdrawal from the digital. The many technical terms that he invents, as onerous as they sometimes are-- unilateral duality, One- in- One, vision- in- One, cloning, and so on-- are all attempts 
to suppress and supersede a fundamentally digital world.

    33 26/08/2014   5:06:08 PM

xxxiv  Introduction

Of course, the digital does not ultimately mean computers. It is im- perative  to  consider  the  digital  above  and  beyond  the  micro  niche  of 
twentieth-  and twenty- first- century technology. Digitality is much more capacious than the computer, both historically, because there simply is no 
history without digitality, but also conceptually, because the digital is a basic ingredient within ontology, politics, and most everything in between.

From all of this may be distilled a principle of su"cient digitality moti-vated  by  the  digital  decision.  The  principle  of  sufficient  digitality  is 
de!ned similarly to its philosophical counterpart. To arrive at the prin-ciple, one need only conjure the spirit of Alan Turing: the computer is a 
machine that can reproduce the functionality of any other machine, pro-vided its functionality can be broken down into logical processes. Likewise the principle of sufficient digitality states that for everything in the world  there  is  a  process  of  distinction  appropriate  to  it.  The  principle 
asserts, in essence, that digitality is an autonomous !eld able to encode and simulate anything whatsoever within the universe. Adjacent to the 
principle of suficientcy and working in concert with it, the digital deci-sion  is  simply  the  decision  to  start  down  such  a  path,  the  decision  to 
decide at all, the decision of distinction.The  digital  computer  "is  endowed  with  the  capacity  for  synthesis, 
connection and communication, interfacing and exchange, all of which are inherently philosophical or world- bound," writes Laruelle, explicitly 
linking computers and philosophy. "Hegel is dead, but he lives on inside the electric calculator."

22

The  digital  logic  is  deeply  rooted  within  the  core  of  philosophy,  Laruelle claims, and it is the goal of non- philosophy to unilateralize the 

digital decision and withdraw from it:

The duality of the discrete [nume'rique] and the continuous, of the mathematical and  the  philosophical . . . is  a  constant throughout history and 
permeates all of Western thought. The discrete regularly claims victory, 
even as the continuous continues to survive. . . . Non- philosophy is, among 
other things, a way to register this survival without pretending that one 
side  will  crush  the  other.  Rather,  non- philosophy  connects  each  to  an 
instance that is neither the continuous (dominant in philosophy) nor the 
discontinuous (dominant in science).23

    34 26/08/2014   5:06:08 PM

  Introduction  xxxv

In sum, although we explore Laruelle's body of work from a number of di)erent angles, including the political, ontological, and aesthetic, the 
goal of this book is to superimpose Laruelle onto digitality, resulting in a new unilateral posture vis- a`- vis both digitality and philosophy. The outcome  is  potentially  quite  interesting,  because  it  means  that  Laruelle's non- standard theorization and axiomatization of the philosophical infrastructure may also be applied to the digital infrastructure. The same kinds of things that Laruelle says about philosophy and non- philosophy can 
also be said about digitality and non- digitality. The same kind of with-drawal, the same generic, the same immanence, the same materiality-- all 
of these things o)er a real, tangible parallel to the computerized world, not to resist or  reflect on it so much as to demonstrate that it never was 
determining in the first place.

    35 26/08/2014   5:06:08 PM

!"#$%&'()%#*+)*+#,*'--.%-)/+%0-'*1%Pa r t   I
Laruelle and the Digital

    1 26/08/2014   5:06:08 PM

o ne
The One Divides in Two

"It should be taken quite seriously that the `one' is a number," wrote Badiou in Being and Event, only partially in jest.

1 Indeed, the one is a number, 

and as a number it has something to say about how things are. Things are one, or things are not one. And if things are more than one they are a 

multiplicity. To say something is is to say it is as one. To utter exists, as Parmenides does in his poem, means implicitly to cry exists as one!

Indeed,  Badiou  begins  his  treatise  on  the  one  and  the  multiple  by returning to Parmenides, who was himself the first to consider the question philosophically:

Since its Parmenidean organization, ontology has built the portico of its 
ruined temple out of the following experience: what presents itself is essentially multiple; what presents itself is essentially one. The reciprocity of the 
one and being is certainly the inaugural axiom of philosophy . . . yet it is 
also its impasse. . . . For if being is one, then one must posit that what is not 
one, the multiple, is not.2

Having wedged himself into this undesirable corner, that the multiples of the world are not, Badiou is forced to do great violence to Parmenides-- 
albeit a dramatically creative philosophical violence-- by taking the ulti-mate step. For it is not the case that the one is and the multiple is not, but 
rather the reverse: "The one is not."3Badiou's leap is one of the most virtuosic moments in recent philosophy. In taking this step Badiou proposes that we retain the one but in the 

3

    3 26/08/2014   5:06:08 PM

4  The One Divides in Two
form of a de(ated one. Not the God- like one of neoplatonism, Badiou's one is merely the "oneness" or "one- e)ect" of being.

4 So what began as  

a ri) on the Parmenidean word play-- The one is? The one is not?-- ends up in Badiou as a new ontological foundation in which "the One is not, 

there are only actual multiplicities, and the ground is void."5Masquerading as a friend, Badiou also does great violence to Deleuze 
in his book Deleuze: The Clamor of Being by trying to demonstrate that Deleuze is secretly a Platonist (like Badiou himself).

6 But Badiou borrowed much more from Deleuze than is commonly acknowledged, and in the course of his commentary he rearticulates clearly perhaps for the 

first time Deleuze's basic ontological contribution, his defense of the uni-vocity of being.

What follows are some of Deleuze's claims, !ltered through Badiou's prism:  "Being  is  formulated  univocally  as:  One,  virtual,  inorganic  life, 
immanence, the nonsensical donation of sense, pure duration, relation, eternal  return, and the a*rmation  of chance."

7 Being is  "univocal" for 

Deleuze, and likewise the one refers to the "univocity" or "oneness" of Being.

Univocal means that there is a sameness between being and its expres-sion. Deleuze explained this condition most eloquently in his Di#erence 
and Repetition, first at an early point in the text:

There  has  only  ever  been  one  ontological  proposition:  Being  is  univocal. . . . From Parmenides to Heidegger it is the same voice which is taken 
up, in an echo which itself forms the whole deployment of the univocal.  
A  single voice raises the clamour  of being. . . . In e)ect, the essential in 
univocity is not that Being is said in a single and same sense, but that it is 
said,  in  a  single  and  same  sense,  of  all  its  individuating  di)erences  or 
intrinsic modalities. Being is the same for all these modalities, but these 
modalities are not the same. It is "equal" for all, but they themselves are not 
equal. It is said of all in a single sense, but they themselves do not have the 
same sense.8

Then again in the climactic !nal sentences:

A single and same voice for the whole thousand- voiced multiple, a single 
and same Ocean for all the drops, a single clamour of Being for all beings.9

    4 26/08/2014   5:06:08 PM

  The One Divides in Two  5

These same sentiments reappear in similar phrasing at the midpoint of Deleuze's Logic of Sense, in the powerful -0th Series devoted to univocity.10  Interestingly,  here  Deleuze  is  forced  to  push  beyond  philoso-phy's typical binarism between Being and beings, making an additional 
distinction between Being and what he enigmatically calls "extra- Being."Depending on how neoplatonic one wishes to be, "extra- Being" can 

be interpreted as synonymous with a "One" that is structurally outside  of and prior to Being, in essence a kind of a priori core of Being, or Being 
understood purely from the perspective of its univocity. Thus the nor-mal  metaphysical  model,  consisting  of  two  terms,  Being  and  beings, 
could be supplemented with a third, "prior" term, the one:

Extra- Being (the one) / Being / beings
This risks taking things too far, however, because Deleuze's one should be understood neither as some sort of transcendental category, nor as a 
codeword for God, nor anything else of the sort. In Deleuze the one is simply the oneness of being, being as considered in it most minimal or 
neutral condition of univocity, being understood as a generic aliquid.11But why not take things too far? A more radical discourse on the one, 
inaugurated by Parmenides, reappears in the neoplatonists, particularly Plotinus and Proclus, and today is most evident in the work of Laruelle, 
albeit in altered form. Although Deleuze and Badiou speak often of the one, it does not ultimately take center stage in their work, eclipsing all 
else. In neoplatonism, however, and, di)erently, in Laruelle, the one is abso lutely  central,  so  much  so  that  it  ceases  to  act  as  a  synonym  for 
Being.12In  Laruelle  the  one  is  the  real.  Yet  even  in  being  real  the  one  re- 
mains !rmly autonomous both from philosophy and from Being. The one is radically immanent, meaning that it is absolutely nonconvertible 
with anything whatsoever. It never goes outside of itself to form a rela-tion  with  anything. The  one  has  nothing  to  do  with  existence,  understood in its strict etymological sense of "being out of," because the one  is not "being" and nor is it "out of " anything. "The One is immanence," 
Laruelle  says,  "and  is  not  thinkable  on  the  terrain  of  transcendence (ekstasis,  scission,  nothingness,  objectivation,  alterity,  alienation,  meta 
or epekeina)."13

    5 26/08/2014   5:06:08 PM

6  The One Divides in Two

In its immanence, Laruelle's one is understood as identity. That is, the one  is  an  identity  or  commonality  with  itself  without  ever  being  construed  as  a  transcendental.  In  fact,  in  a  reversal  of  the  classical  meta-physics evident in everyone from Plato and Kant to Hegel and beyond, 
in  which  the  transcendental  is  considered  to  be  the  primary  precon-dition  or  grounding  for  reality,  Laruelle  asserts  the  one  as  the  imma- 
nent real from which transcendental instances are, in his terminology, "cloned."

14 In this way, Laruelle can not be called a metaphysician, at least 

not any type of metaphysician currently known, because he denies the basic  mechanics  of  metaphysics such as  manifestation,  representation, 

or existence.So although Laruelle and Deleuze both reference the one, they have 
almost  nothing  similar  to  say  about  it.  The  main  di)erence  is  that Deleuze's  one  is  ultimately  not  di)erentiated  from  Being.  Rather  for 
Deleuze, a good materialist, the oneness of the one is expressed in all the multiple  permutations  of  Being.  Whereas  for  Laruelle  it  is  impossible  
for the one to "appear" or even be "voiced" across all the multiplicities of being because the one would then have to be "in" Being, and thus would 
cease being in itself. In other words, the one is not the one by virtue of having been realized in Being.

15 So although they share an equal interest 

in  immanence,  Laruelle  considers  Deleuze  too  timid,  accusing  him  of not being immanent enough.

16

One of Badiou's masters, Lacan, will help expand this brief synopsis of the  one.  In  Lacan  the  one  is  understood  as  an  assemblage  of  the  self. 

While speaking about love and sexuality, Lacan evokes the image of the "intuitive, fusional, amorous" self as one: "`We are but one,'" say the lovers, who, as it goes, are as one (esh. "Everyone knows, of course, that two have never become but one, but nevertheless, `we are but one.' The idea 
of love begins with that."17Then  the  playfulness  subsides  slightly  and  Lacan  adds,  "The  One 
everyone talks about all the time is, first of all, a kind of mirage of the One you believe yourself to be. Not to say that that is the whole horizon. 
There are as many Ones as you like-- they are characterized by the fact that none of them resemble any of the others in any way-- see the first 
hypothesis in the Parmenides."18Lacan clearly lacks a reverence for this particular one, which is but a 
"mirage" constitutive of the subject. The one is something to be picked 

    6 26/08/2014   5:06:08 PM

  The One Divides in Two  7
up and modi!ed as new symbolic economies impinge upon the consti-tution of the self. Although this is no ontology, Lacan has not deviated 
very widely at all from the tradition of "monist" or univocal being set out in Parmenides, Deleuze, and the others. These ones-- "as many Ones as 
you like"-- are but the multiplicities of the instances of being, concordant with how Deleuze de!ned univocity.

But the next paragraph begins to complicate the matter and reveals the real source of Badiou's a)ection for this particular passage in Lacan's 
seminars, as Lacan makes reference to set theory:

Set theory bursts onto the scene by positing the following: let us speak of 
things as One that are strictly unrelated to each other. Let us put together 
objects of thought, as they are called, objects of the world, each of which 
counts as one. Let us assemble these absolutely heterogeneous things, and 
let us grant ourselves the right to designate the resulting assemblage by a 
letter. This is how set theory expresses itself at the outset.19

The two lovers, the two relatively heterogeneous things, join together as one. But they do so only under the aegis of a letter, which Lacan reveals 
to  be  his  famous  a,  the  supplementary  other  that always accompanies  the one.

In other words, there are three of them, but in reality, there are two plus a. 
This two plus a, from the standpoint of a, can be reduced, not to the two 
others, but to a One plus a. . . . This identi!cation, which is produced in a 

ternary articulation, is grounded in the fact that in no case can two as such 
serve as a basis. Between two, whatever they may be, there is always the 
One and the Other, the One and the a, and the Other cannot in any way be 
taken as a One.20

Although Lacan shares little with the previous philosophers of the one, they all  pursue a similar goal, to avoid the classical binarism of metaphysics. Lacan again: In no case can two serve as a basis. Philosophers  of immanence wish to collapse the binarism back to the singularity of 
the one, while here Lacan, in a move that can be properly labeled post- structuralist,  wishes  to  exceed  the  binarism  by  always  already  supplementing it with a tertiary level. In Lacanian algebra this is expressed in 

    7 26/08/2014   5:06:08 PM

8  The One Divides in Two
the delightful formula, $ + $ = %. (Whereas our previous chaperones of the one would likely have expressed it in the purely a*rmative sense of  
$ + $ + $ . . . etc. [Deleuze], or even more simply in the identity equation $ = $ [Laruelle].)

Now a crossroads, for we arrive at a decision point that remains unre-solved. The one can be understood in quite di)erent terms. The one can 
simply be another name for Being, putting the stress on the continuous, full, indivisible nature of Being. Or the one can refer to the univocal way 
of Being, allowing a proliferation of real multiplicities that despite their real di)erences are nevertheless all vocalized in terms of their oneness. 
Or in a more extreme sense, the one can cease to be a synonym for Being and assume its own space apart from it, either as an a priori precondition, or as a radically immanent real, unmanifested and ir reflected. Or other  options  still:  the  neoplatonic  transcendental  One,  the  Lacanian 
post- structuralist one, and still others not yet itemized.The question is Which one? Is it best to side with Deleuze, who maintains his univocity of Being precisely to avoid having to speak about a real  metaphysical  split between the  one  and  its  instances?  Is  it  best  to 
accept  the  upside- down  Platonism  of  Badiou in  which  the  one  is  not, multiplicities  are,  and  events  again  are  not?  Or  is  it  best  to  adopt  the 
weird materialism of Laruelle, who admits that the one is real and imma-nent to itself, while we, the science- bound "clones" of the one can only 
run  alongside the  real  and  think "according  to  it"  but never  "of "  it or "about" it?

In order to answer these questions we need to address a number of things more closely. We start with three questions: What is philosophy? 
Where did philosophy come from? And what is it like without philoso-phy? Following Laruelle's own tendencies, we limit ourselves to Western 
philosophy and focus on the continental tradition. Yet the claims made about philosophy may be  easily extended into  adjacent literatures  and 
discourses.
What  is  philosophy?  (the  standard  model).  Philosophy  is  rooted  in  a grand illusion. The illusion is vividly evident in philosophy's most archetypal mode, metaphysics, which suggests that the ultimate task of philo-sophy is to watch over a grand division. What division, if not the division 
between appearance and presence, essence and instance, and Being and 

    8 26/08/2014   5:06:08 PM

  The One Divides in Two  9
beings (see William Edouard Daege, The Invention of Painting, the fron-tispiece of this chapter)? To do philosophy means to assent to the fact 
that  the  universe is  structured  in  this  way.  It  means  to  assent  to  these particular conditions of possibility. To live means to mediate life by way 
of the grand illusion. And to live means to assume that the illusion was made to be grasped by us, that it is the special mode of being that is ours 
or  mine,  as  Heidegger  says.  To  live  philosophically  means  to  live  in  a world "by and for" us.

21

Why call it the grand illusion? Is this to hint of a grand delusion, and thus to excoriate the metaphysical gambit as something less than serious? Not exactly, for the grand illusion is indeed impressive, an epic con-struction of colossal proportion. By illusion is meant a construction, and 
thus  something  like  an  ideological  construction,  just  as  consciousness itself requires a certain kind of construction (a sca)olding of intention 
and absorption between self and world).But illusion also contains the root meaning "play"; it means to put into 
play  against  something  else,  from  the  Latin  meaning  "to  play  with  or mock." Hence, withholding any derisive presuppositions about the term, 
"illusion" is quite appropriate for the metaphysical condition because it gives a basic architecture of relations in play. The beings of Being are "in 
play."  Thus  to  call  the  basic  practice  of  philosophy  a  grand  illusion  is nothing like a normative judgment-- indeed normative judgments themselves are only possible within the regime of philosophy-- it is simply a theoretical observation: in uncoupling from the Godhead, what simply 
is transforms into something that is being, and the core modes and cat-egories of being are inaugurated as such. The inauguration is a "putting 
into  play"  of  the  mechanics  of  our  world,  and  hence  like  an  oversize ontological cinema, or the simultaneous !ring of every synapse in the 
human brain, or the masses storming the Winter Palace, or the annual migration of the monarch butter(y-- like all these, a grand illusion.

What is philosophy? Thankfully Laruelle has made this question rela-tively  easy to answer, despite how daunting it might seem. To  address  
the  question  we  may  simply  itemize  the  various  root- level  conditions  of philosophy, because they all tend to coalesce around something like a 
philosophical principle or a philosophical decision. In the same way that physicists  agree,  more  or  less,  on  a  standard  model  that  describes  the 
elementary forces of the universe, philosophers agree, more or less, on 

    9 26/08/2014   5:06:09 PM

:;  The One Divides in Two
their own standard model for what it means to do philosophy. Thus the following  paragraphs  all  describe  a  similar  mode.  They  all  describe  a 
similar model for philosophy.|| The media principle. Recall the opening sections of the book, for the 
media principle already illustrates the basic architecture of philosophy. As  discussed  in  the  introduction,  Laruelle  states  the  media  principle 
elegantly as "the real is communicational, the communicational is real."22 What this  means  is  that philosophy  assumes the  real  to  be  something 
that  can  be  grasped  and  communicated  beyond  itself  into  a  receiving mind, the mind of the investigating philosopher. Even a skeptic, while 
doubting  the  availability  of  such  knowledge,  implicitly  assents  to  the basic parameters of the discussion (the real, communicability, interpretation,  philosophy).  Laruelle  uses  the  technical  term  amphibology  to describe  this  condition.  By  amphibology  he  means  anything  in  which 
there is an ontological ambiguity established between the real and the represented,  or  between  Being  and  beings.  He  means  anything  that  is 
"amphibious" across two zones, just as frogs and newts are amphibious across land and water. This is why we began the book with Hermes, for 
he  is  the  most  amphibious  of  all  the  gods.  Anything  that  follows  the media principle can be labeled an amphibology. Hence metaphysics is  
an  amphibology,  and  so  is phenomenology and  many  other-- Laruelle would say all-- philosophical pursuits.

|| The architecture of distinction. As Badiou puts it, philosophy means three  things:  "What  is  to  be  understood  by  Being?  What  is  thinking? 
How does the essential identity of thinking and Being realize itself?"23 Parmenides put philosophy on this course, and it has scarcely diverted in 
the many years since. In her fantastic book on Heidegger, Luce Irigaray phrases it like this: "The proposition at the origin of metaphysics: to be-- 
to think-- the same"; or in less asyndetic language: "Metaphysics always supposes, in some manner, a solid crust from which to raise a construction."24 The architecture of metaphysics therefore requires a fundamen- tal distinction between ground and construction, or between materiality 
and the relations formed "above" or "on top of " it. The many synonyms for such a ground include object, body, entity, a being, extension, thing, 
matter, and substance. Likewise the many synonyms for the forming of relation include information, thought, reason, middle, and language. The 
notion that these two lists of terms have anything to do with one another, 

    10 26/08/2014   5:06:09 PM

  The One Divides in Two  ::
indeed as Heidegger argues that they naturally belong to one another as a structure of "appropriation," is the philosophical gesture par excellence.

|| The ontological principle and the principle of su"cient reason. These two  principles,  which  are  similar,  appear  in  the  work  of  a  number  of 
philosophers. My preferred version is the one already stated, the version that  appears  in  Whitehead:  "No  actual  entity,  then  no  reason."

25  It  is  

similar to the previously described architecture of distinction, in that it requires something like an object- relation dualism. The "actual entity" 

plays the role of the object, while the "reason" plays the role of relation. In coupling them, Whitehead asserts that one cannot exist without the 
other, and indeed that the condition of the world is one in which these two  things  are  teammates.  Whitehead's  phrasing  is  a  mirror  image  of 
how the principle appears in Leibniz-- "Anything that happens does so for a de!nite reason"-- but in the end they both achieve the same result. 
Heidegger concurs as well: during a discussion of Parmenides and iden-tity,  he  translates  Parmenides's  important  third  fragment  as  "For  the 
same perceiving (thinking) as well as being" (&' ()* )+&, -'./- .0&/- &. 1)2 ./-)2), and uses the fragment as a launch pad to explore the primordial relation of identity at the heart of being.|| Yet the topic of mediation and distinction is but a minor note to a 
much larger discourse in Laruelle concerning the question of what phi-losophy  is.  Recall  the  two  main  concepts  de!ned  in  the  introduction:  
the philosophical decision and principle of su"cient philosophy. The phil-osophical decision refers to the decision, made willingly or unwillingly, 
Laruelle argues, by all philosophy and all philosophers, to  reflect on any-thing whatsoever. Likewise the principle of sufficient philosophy refers 
to the privilege of doing such a thing, the privilege to relate to anything whatsoever. With the swagger of its privilege, philosophy brazenly assumes 
that there can be a philosophy of being, a philosophy of art, a philosophy of sport, a philosophy of anything and everything under the sun. Philosophy is thus exceedingly immodest; it is up to any task, and thus is "sufficient" for any and all practices of philosophizing.

In fact Laruelle takes pleasure in pointing out that the question "What is philosophy?" is something only a philosopher would pose. It !ts the 
philosopher's personality perfectly. Philosophy is an endeavor that end-lessly seeks to establish rational relations spanning the two categories of 
mind and matter, and hence endlessly poses the question "What is x?" In 

    11 26/08/2014   5:06:09 PM

:!  The One Divides in Two
this sense, any and all philosophical pursuits are merely secret allegories for the question "What is philosophy?"

26

Thesis  II.  This  reveals  the  basic  law  of  the  standard  model,  whatever given  is  riven.  Having  brie(y  described  the  root- level  conditions  of 
philosophy-- the  media  principle,  the  architecture  of  distinction,  the ontological principle, and the philosophical decision-- we now summarize a few key points having to do with the rivenness of being.First and foremost, philosophy is a digitization of the real because it is 
predicated on the one dividing in two. Laruelle describes it well in a late work devoted to the topic of generic science:

The most general structure of philosophy-- and I mean the structure of all 
philosophical and in particular epistemological systems-- is built from the 
varying combinations of unity and duality, of One and Two. We call this  
a becoming- world whenever a pair of these heterogenous terms, in fus- 
ing immanently together, nevertheless allows one of the pair to obtain primacy over the whole and assume responsibility for the immanent relation, 
thereby  uncoupling  and  asserting  itself  anew  as  a  third  transcendental 
term.27

The splitting of the real and the digitization of the real are synonymous. The term being is simply a contracted way of stating "being riven," and 
the standard model is the state in which there exists a riven being placed in conjugation with itself as being- riven.

28

In  other  words  Plato  cheated. He  forced  the  one, forcing  the  one  to birth philosophy: "Seeing it as the transcendental rival to Being, Plato 

`forced' the One-- but forcing only in a negative sense-- separating the One from Being, before cleaving them together again and forcing them 
to orbit each other. Philosophical forcing means to undo contraries that have been sutured together, to separate the contraries."

29 Such cheating 

(dubbed here "negative" forcing), to which we return in the !nal chapter, entails the inauguration of a structure of distinction or auto- alienation. 

And this is nothing other than philosophy itself.So it is easy to agree with Michel Henry when he observes that "for 
Hegel the Concept is nothing other than the very fact of alienating one-self, the process of alienation as such."

30 If the concept is the process of 

    12 26/08/2014   5:06:09 PM

  The One Divides in Two  :3
alienation  as  such,  then  the  same  is  true  about  relation,  information,  language, or thought: they are all the process of alienation as such, for 
they  all  depend  upon  a  fundamental  digitization  between  things.  In  the case of relation, it is a digitization between whatever two terms are 
brought into relation; for information, the digitization between two dis-cernible forms; for language, the digitization between represented and 
representation; for thought, the digitization between thinker and what-ever is being  reflected upon.

Likewise it is easy to agree with Kant on his basic description of phi-losophy: "There can be nothing more desirable to a philosopher, than to 
be able to derive the scattered multiplicity of the concepts or the prin-ciples, which had occurred  to him  in concrete use, from a principle  a 
priori, and to unite everything in this way in one cognition. . . . He has attained a System."

31

Kant's "system" is a newfound conjugation of the pure and the con-crete,  the  universal  and  the  scattered  multiplicity.  The  point  is  not  to 

quibble over details. It does not particularly matter whether one can or cannot defend the a priori, or whether "concrete use" consists of scattered multiplicities. The point is the architecture itself: a system, inter-nally variegated according to the law of two.

Why stop there? For the concept or the system are not the only illus-trations of the process of internal alienation via variegation. Within the 
condition of being- given, all categories are equally riven. This includes the concept (relation, preposition, link, sense), but also bodies (beings, 
entities, objects, nodes) as well as events (force, !at, cause, will, process). Hence  bodies  must  also  be  considered  in  terms  of  alienation:  in  their 
extension and transcendental persistence bodies are alienated from them-selves through space and through time. Likewise events must be understood in terms of alienation: an event inaugurates a di)erential of evental states as a "before" alienated from an "after." In short, under the standard 
model, bodies, languages, and events are all equally riven.In  specifying  that  all  categories  are  equally  riven,  it will  not  hurt  to 
specify an additional corollary that follows directly from the ontological principle: all modes of being- given are equally riven. I have yet to itemize 
these modes, that being the task of the next chapter, so I speak now only in  very  general  terms.  But  the  notion  is  already  contained  within  the 
grand illusion: being in the world means being in a condition of division 

    13 26/08/2014   5:06:09 PM

:4  The One Divides in Two
and relation. And hence being requires the recognition of a fundamental alienation.

Being is on the side of the world, which means it is part of a universe in which things relate to or uncouple from other things. In the world, 
entities may virtualize or dissolve into other entities just as they may be "solved" or actualized. This, then, is the basic architecture of the standard model of philosophy . . . the primordial distinction that there must be a distinction.

The Standard Model,
or the essential digitization
of philosophy as being- riven:

God-- humanity
essence-- instance

relation-- object

mind-- body
a)ect-- comportment

information-- data

Being-- being
ontology-- ontics

life-- the living

spirit-- matter

ideal-- actual
subject-- object
orientation-- world

form-- content
representation-- presentation

Where did philosophy come from? (the advent). One of Heidegger's most powerful concepts concerning ontology is Ereignis, which has an almost 
absurd translation history into English. Ereignis has been rendered awk-wardly but technically as both "enowning" and "the event of Appropriation";  the  term  refers  to  a  sense  of  belonging,  a  sense  of  being  owned within something and thus becoming assimilated as proper or "appropriate" to it. Heidegger uses the term when he speaks about the special relationship of belonging forged between humanity and being. Man and 

    14 26/08/2014   5:06:09 PM

  The One Divides in Two  :5
being belong together, he writes in the essay "The Principle of Identity," "A belonging to Being prevails within man, a belonging which listens to 
Being because it is appropriated to Being."32Heidegger also  speaks  of  Ereignis in  terms of the  enigmatic  expres- 
sion "It gives" (es gibt). The "It gives" is the closest Heidegger ever gets to Laruelle, the closest he gets to the one. For in partially suspending the 
subject of the verb-- but he  is too timid, leaving in place that pathetic little pronoun "it"-- Heidegger begins to speculate about the advent of 
Being.  It  is  crucial  for  Heidegger  that  the  phrase  have  an  impersonal subject, as in "It gives being" or "It gives time," not "Being gives . . . ," for 
there  must  be  some  sort  of  generic  condition  of  possibility  for  being, some sort of advental precondition. This advent is simply the belonging- 
togetherness of the ontological categories. "What determines both, time and Being, in their own, that is, in their belonging together, we shall call: 
Ereignis, the event of Appropriation. Ereignis will be translated as Appro-priation or event of Appropriation. One should bear in mind, however, 
that `event' is not simply an occurrence, but that which makes any occur-rence possible."

33

Ereignis thus describes the event that establishes belonging-- the notion that certain aspects of being belong together-- and hence the event that 

establishes relation.  Ereignis  is  therefore  a digitization  and  is  compati- ble with the standard model. Heidegger's being is distinctive; in stating 
"It  gives"  he  is  simultaneously  stating  the  advent  of  digital  being.  For Heidegger there is a distinction to be made between man and Being, or 
between Being and time.Yet what is ultimately most important about Ereignis is not so much the 

question of belonging, but rather the question of the event. So although the  presence  of  Being  constitutes  a  relation,  the  advent  of  Being  is  an 
event for Heidegger, not a relation or an object or some other ontological category. (This is part of the genius of Heidegger; it allows him to make 
his  argument  about  the  historicity  of  Being,  namely  that  Being  might have begun and that it might end.)

By putting the stress on Being as advent or event it is possible to strike an unholy alliance between Heidegger and Laruelle. The world is not the 
result  of  a  thing  (another  world  to  spawn  this  one;  the  acorn  and  the oak), nor is it the result of a relation (metaphysics; God the Father and 
God the Son). Being carries the condition of relationality as such within 

    15 26/08/2014   5:06:09 PM

:6  The One Divides in Two
itself as one of its attributes, yes, but this does not mean that Being is the result of a relation. In fact Being is the result of an event.

In other words, the standard model is the result of an event not a rela-tion. There is no relation between the one and Being. It is not possible to 
convert one into the other through the alchemy of metaphysics. Because it is an event, the advent of the world is an unexplained arrival. One can 
quite technically label it, without irony or pomposity, a miracle.Was the world created, yes or no? Of course the answer is yes. But there 
is no glory in referring to something called "creation" or "the  advent," because the event of being is continually being renewed and reactuated. 
Just as Peter Hallward describes Deleuze's work as a "philosophy of cre-ation," the structure of advent- event is a constant push and pull into and 
out of the real.
What is it like without philosophy? (the prevent). If the advent is a digiti-zation, then the practice of philosophy, particularly in its most archetypal 
mode as metaphysics, is also a form of digitization, in that it requires the division into two of Being and beings, essence and instance, Life and the 
living, the pure and the practical, a priori and a posteriori, foundation and  logic,  genesis  and  structure,  metaphysics  and  physics,  and  so  on. 
The suggestion is not that these pairs are mere iterations of one another, or that they refer to the same thing, simply that they are pairs, that something has been rent apart and cleaved back together again. Such is the essence of the standard model.

What would happen if the advent were reversed? What would happen if,  instead  of  being  created,  the  standard  model  was  uncreated?  What 
would happen if we decline to make the decision? It will require a new term, the prevent, which means two things at once: the prevent is both 
what  comes  before  the  event  (pre- event)  and  what  hinders  the  event (prevention).  To  think  the  prevent  is  to  think  a  universe  without  the 
standard model, and thus without both philosophy and digitality.Admittedly it is di*cult to speak about the prevent because the normal way of speaking about the world assumes a non- real world, which is to say a world of division, alienation, manifestation, and representation. 
However this should not discourage  us, because  such di*culties are  a comment not on the speculative or impoverished nature of the real, but 
on the impoverished nature of our alienated languages.

    16 26/08/2014   5:06:09 PM

  The One Divides in Two  :7

So let us begin with language itself, as a soft segue into what follows. The easiest way to approach the prevent is to convert "being" from gerund back to in!nitive. So  from "being" to "be." Alternately one  might strip the third person singular by removing its implied subject. So from 
"it  is"  to  simply  "is."  The  challenge  is  to  deprive  language  of  its  tran-scendental aspects, leaving an immanent core, which itself will gradually 
fade away once the transcendental policeman has been silenced. So the continuous  nature  of  "being"  as  a  presence  that  persists  through  time 
and space-- in other words as the sufficient transcendental-- shifts to the much more generic "be." And the coupling of pronoun and verb in "it is," 
which  cannot  help  but  presuppose  a  transcendental  relation  between actor and action, if not a transcendental "it" itself, shifts to the unquali!ed "is." These are some of the primary names of the one revealed by the prevent: be, is, real. But never: being, it is, reality.

Why  put  the  stress  on  uncoupling  words  from  their  transcendental forms? The one requires an uncoupling of the transcendental pairings, 
arriving not so much at a "divorced" language but an unconjugated or preconjugated language. A similar argument could be made about the 
way in which nouns are declined, the aim of which is to account for all the distinct cases of the word. But what if there are no cases of the word? 
Such  is  the  condition  of  the  one.  It  requires  indistinguishing  between cases, an indistinction of the declination.

But  there  is  a  danger,  for  in  these  kinds  of  discussions  there  is  the  ever- present danger of narrating the story of the one as a story of the fall, 
as a story of the before and the after. To be sure, the one is neither a place beyond, nor even a place right here, hiding in plain sight. The one is not 
from a special time, a time forgotten or a time to come. The story of the one is not the story of the Garden of Eden. The one is not transcendental, nor is it mythological. On the contrary, it is real, which means it is the closest to us, quite literally the least theological, the least speculative.

Laruelle "apriorizes" the world. Under classical Kantian metaphysics the a priori is the realm of the transcendentals (space, time, identity, scientific truths, and so on) and the a posteriori is the realm of the actuals, the real, the empirical (you, me, my thoughts, my body, this place, this world). 
Kant's approach is to maintain a distinction between these two realms. He  privileges  the  transcendental,  of  course,  but  he  also  demonstrates 

    17 26/08/2014   5:06:09 PM

:8  The One Divides in Two
that  the  transcendental  is  just  one  component  of  experience  even  if  it perpetually infuses and subtends it.

Of course, many thinkers working in the wake of Kant have recon!g-ured these terms-- for Deleuze, the point is to (atten the division entirely, 
such that the virtual is real, and any transcendental categories are de!ned and experienced purely and immanently in the self- expression of matter. 
And  for  Hegel,  via  Fichte  and  Schelling,  the  point  is  to  embolden  the realm of idea into a pure logical science of self- expression.

It has been said that Kant is to Laruelle as Hegel is to Marx, the elder !gures producing a bourgeois idealism that must be inverted into a new 
science, be it the science of political economy for Marx or the science  of  non- philosophy  for  Laruelle.  Hegel  was  standing  on  his  head, after  
all,  so  why  not  Kant  too?  Although  partially  helpful,  this  formulation does not entirely capture Laruelle's precise intervention into philosophy, 
Kantian or otherwise. Under Laruelle the realm of the analytic a priori is no longer the minority realm, but the majority realm. The a priori is no 
longer simply the transcendental but the real as well. Likewise the things formerly considered real (you, me, my body, this place) are now transcendental, for they are the transcendental clones of the one.To borrow a term of his own creation, Laruelle "apriorizes" the world. 
He  reverses  the  real  and  the  transcendental  (from  their  Kantian  posi-tions)  and  recasts  both  real  and  transcendental  as  a  priori.  Hence  the 
real, which Laruelle calls the one, is a priori by virtue of being an imma-nent identity: true immanence can only be obtained if the real is a priori. 
Likewise  the  transcendentals  are  also  a  priori,  including  the  subject,  axiomatic and theorematic claims, and even non- philosophy itself.

(The only domain that remains steadfastly a posteriori is philosophy itself, and the regional knowledges and sciences that ape the basic philosophical conceit. They are the new "data," the new empirical knowledge o)ered up for non- philosophical axiomatization and dissection.)

But although Laruelle seems to collapse the a priori/a posteriori dis-tinction,  in  essence  apriorizing  it,  this  does  not  necessarily  mean  that 
non- philosophy is the domain of the prior, the pure, or the original. On the contrary, non- philosophy is the domain of the last, not the first, as 

evidenced by it being causally determined in the last instance. Laruelle never summons us to go back to first principles or determine the universal 
possibility of cognition, as philosophers like Kant or Heidegger do. Rather 

    18 26/08/2014   5:06:09 PM

  The One Divides in Two  :9
he entreats the non- philosophical subject to withdraw from the decision, and dwell along side the last, the least, the !nite.

Thesis III. The one is a prevent, is part of the prevental mode, and hence has no concourse with the standard model. A synonym for this is virtualization. The event of Being is what establishes a world of transcenden-tal presence as the "present continuous," a world of !gure and ground, a 
world of objects and relations.By contrast the prevent is a radically passive abstention from the event. 
The prevent means withdrawal of decision-- "decision" meaning literally to "cleave" or "di)erentiate"-- and thus a withdrawal of the event. To speak 
of Being means implicitly to speak of "trenchant" or "riven" Being. But the prevent or the virtual indicates a metastasis of Being within the totality of insufficient and undi)erentiated alternative states. As prevent, the real pertains to no decision, to no event, to no presence.

The real indicates a withdrawal of the event of being, and in so doing shifts  over  to  the  purely  a  priori  realm  of  the  all.  And  here  even  for- 
merly stalwart terms like be and is begin to dissolve. For in the strictest sense, the one forms no mixture at all with the existence or inexistence 

of things.Here  Laruelle exceeds even Parmenides:  be, is,  not be, not  is-- who 
cares? The one is oblivious to such worldly concerns. The real one is a condition of pure virtuality, and thus requires that standard notions of 
the event and the transcendental be suspended in favor of the prevent and immanence. Be, is, virtual, real, a priori-- these are some of the primary names of the one.
No actual object, no actual relation, no actual event. Next let us inter-rogate the one from the reverse perspective, from the three co- original 
attributes of the standard model: object, relation, and event. From the per-spective of object, the one is not a thing; it has no physical or corporeal 

continuity with being. From the perspective of relation, the one does not relate; it has no formal relation with being. Likewise from the perspective of event, the one does not happen; it does not occasion itself or actu-alize itself as an event.

To reiterate, the real is the condition of the prevent. Although it is true that thought does not hold sway within the real as real (because relation 

    19 26/08/2014   5:06:09 PM

!;  The One Divides in Two
does not hold sway), it is still possible to think the real directly. If White-head's  ontological  principle  states  "No  actual  entity,  then  no  reason," 
through which he describes the state of being- given into a world of orga-nized or rational entities (entities with rationales; rationales as entities), 
then to understand the prevent one must simply undo the ontological principle. It requires only the subtlest redaction: no actual entity and no 
reason. Simply underscore the force of the no. The prevent is a condition in which there are no actual entities (no bodies, no objects, no matter, no 
extension, and so on) and in which there is no reason (no language, no relation, no information, no media, and so on).

Still this only addresses two of the three co- original attributes of the actual. The reversal of Whitehead's ontological principle o)ers a rudimentary description of the condition of bodies and languages in the pre-vent of the real, yet what of the event?

As we already learned from Heidegger, Being is the result of an event. This point is absolutely crucial; it is another way of understanding the 
previous claims about the advent and the creation of the standard model. Being,  as  Being- given,  is  itself  the  homeland  of  relation,  but  it  is  not  
the  result  of  a  relation.  Being- given  unto  the  terrain  of  the  three  co- original attributes necessarily means that relationality exists, as bodies 
relate  through  relations  and  likewise  bodies  and  relations  are  modi- !ed via events. Yet the act of being- given is precisely that, an act, never a 
relation.To put it in Laruellean language, one cannot bring together "One" and 
"Being" under the banner of a relation, stating something along the lines of "The  One  has  a  relation  to  Being" or even "Being has  a  relation  to  
the One." This is impossible within the non- standard model. Instead it is necessary to bring together "One" and "Being" under the banner of the 
event, stating that "the One is cloned as Being," or, as Deleuze might put it, that "the actualization of the virtual is an event." This is why the philosophical decision is a decision, because a decision is an event.Laruellean events are thus a kind of static preemption. They are static 
because the agency of the event is not predicated on the execution of the event; static realities are "known in advance" of any actualization. Likewise, Laruellean events are a preemption because of the attractive gravity of the prevent, which acts in advance of the event and prevents it. In this 
sense, static preemption is simply a synonym for destiny.

    20 26/08/2014   5:06:09 PM

  The One Divides in Two  !:

Iterate the Laruellean logic across the other attributes to reveal their appropriate non- standard cousins. For the prevent reveals that Laruellean objects are in fact black monads, smooth globes of an almost in!nite (imsiness, irresistibly dense and stubbornly opaque. Laruellean objects 
might  best  be  understood  as  "actual  inexistents"  for  as  they  span  the advent they move into the realm of the actual, but in so much as they are 
immanently real they cannot "exist" (in the sense of ekstasis). Laruellean objects are labeled black because they "have no windows" and are thus 
absolutely opaque. And because they have no relation they may be said to "withdraw completely." They are labeled monads because they represent the entire universe of the one within them, and hence are structur-ally metastable or incontinent.

Likewise  Laruellean  relation  is  de!ned  as  unilateral  determination. Such relation is not combinatory and synthetic, like the dialectic. It is not 
di)erential  and  classi!catory, like  empiricism.  Neither  is  it  e*cient  or occasioning, like metaphysics. Rather, unilateral relations are rigorously 
irreversible and non reflective. Unilateral relations are oblivious and pro-phylactic because they impede the legibility of the agents involved and 
prohibit subsequent circuits of call- response or action- reaction.These  three  aspects-- black  objects,  unilaterial  determination,  and 

static  preemption-- only  brie(y  de!ned  here,  are  taken  up  in  greater detail throughout the book.

The horror of philosophy. Because philosophy requires suficientcy, the insu"ciency of objects, relations, and events poses something of a threat. 
It catalyzes a great violence against philosophy.As Eugene Thacker writes, the equiprimorder is supernatural horror, 
the horror of the supernature of the one. Claims made about the super-nature  are  thus  claims  made  directly  about  the  real.  And,  as  Laruelle 
would say, the supernature is just another word for the a priori.Never  the  world- for- us,  nor  even  the  world- in- itself,  the  equiprimorder of the one is the world- without- us. "The world- without- us is the subtraction of the human from the world," Thacker writes. "The world- 
without- us  lies . . .  in  a  nebulous  zone  that  is  at  once  impersonal  and horri!c."

34 This is why the real seems so terrifying from the perspective 

of the world. But it is the philosopher who is horri!ed, not us, for only philosophy is threatened by the one.

    21 26/08/2014   5:06:09 PM

!!  The One Divides in Two

In other words, what is "prior" as a priori is also at the same time a profoundly horri!c priority. The a priori is thus properly labeled "ancient" 
or  "primeval"-- not  so  much  in  terms  of  a  historical  ancestrality  but rather in terms of a structural priority or preemption.

35 What is last is 

also prior or preemptive.Deleuze was on to something when he remarked that "thought `makes' 

di)erence,  but  di)erence  is  monstrous."36  Still,  he  didn't  go  quite  far enough. Digitization is monstrous, but it does not hold a candle to the 

glorious, monstrous cataclysm of the one.

    22 26/08/2014   5:06:09 PM

!"#$%&'()%#*+)*+#,*'--.%-)/+%0-'*1%
t w o
The Standard Model

Hang gliding, bungie jumping, ice climbing. Hulk Hogan, Tony Hawk, John Rambo. In a world of extreme sports and extreme weather, of supersized portions and long tails, is anyone really surprised by the advent of "extreme philosophy"? Laruelle has arrived in America, but couldn't we 
see  this  coming?  Like  when  the  CIA  funded  the  Afghani  mujahideen during the Cold War only to have it come back to haunt them, we funded 
post- structuralism in the "#+,s and '%,s and are today engulfed in the ultimate blowback.

1 You planted the seeds of destruction, and Western 

metaphysics was shaken to its core. But nothing could have prepared you for what would come next. You thought Derrida was extreme, but you 

ain't seen nothing yet. . . . Indeed Laruelle risks being co- opted as just another extreme continental philosopher. Kant systematized the conditions of possibility for knowl-edge;  Heidegger  chronicled  the  end  of  metaphysics;  Derrida  upended 
the foundations of Western thought; and Deleuze signaled the end of the dialectic.  Laruelle  could  be  described  as  simply  the  latest  continental 
thinker to up the ante on philosophy, to be more meta than those who came before, to trump philosophy in the ultimate act of one- upmanship.

Yet this is not an accurate portrayal of the non- standard method, as I hope to show over the course of this volume. Laruelle has no intention of 
extending philosophy, supplementing it, strengthening it, or even com-peting with it. There is nothing meta about Laruelle, and there is nothing 
particularly extreme about his position. Indeed, Laruelle never uses such terms, but instead describes his own endeavors as axiomatic and generic.

!5

    25 26/08/2014   5:06:10 PM

!6  The Standard Model

Rather than pushing philosophy further, Laruelle simply abstains from participation. He declines to make the decision. Like Bartleby's "I would 
prefer not to" or the Occupy movement's "We have no demands," Laruelle declines to participate in philosophy, and likewise declines all structures 
or  relations  that  mimic  the  basic  philosophical  stance.  But  an  absten- tion  is  not  a  transcendental  withdrawal,  that  much  is  clear,  for  in  his 
abstention Laruelle does not "go meta" by stepping backward in order to gain better perspective on that raving beast called philosophy. He does 
not wish to  reflect on philosophy, nor represent  it,  nor deconstruct it, nor recast it in another mold, for these are all simply the tricks and conceits of philosophical technology crafted and perfected over the course of the past few millennia. "Philosophical technology has been withdrawn 
mimetically  from  the  World,  in  order  to   reflect  and  reproduce  it,"  he remarked in one of his short experimental texts. But "such technology is 
inadequate for thinking the Universe."2To be sure, Laruelle acknowledges the existence of the world, escap- 
ing that special gnostic trap in which the world is cast as a mere fallen illusion obscuring a heaven yet to come. Indeed, the world exists. But the 
world is philosophical.
Thesis IV on the epithets: (A) the one has no epithets. Pre!xes and prep-ositions reek of metaphysics. Only a metaphysical universe would allow 
some things to be for other things or of or from them. The true one would do away with such connectors and quali!ers, for the one has no epithets.

"Where are they, the instruments of this thinking in, by but not of or within  the  One?"

3  What  a  grand  lament,  so  generative,  so  instructive. 

Through his lament Laruelle indicates the crucial importance of the prep-osition, how the preposition acts philosophically by determining structures  of  belonging  between  one  thing  and  another  thing. Prepositions are one of the important ways in which language demonstrates relation, 
and thus any critique of relation would need to devote some time to the preposition.  In  fact,  as  a  critique  of  relation,  Laruelle's  entire  project 
might be usefully described as little more than an extended treatise on the preposition.

It  would  be  hasty  to  conclude  that  Laruelle  is  against  the  preposi- tion, even as he tends to suppress certain ones and suspend other ones  
in  paren theses,  in  an  incongruous  nod  to  the  syntactical  mannerisms  

    26 26/08/2014   5:06:10 PM

  The Standard Model  !7
of post- structuralist writing. Laruelle generally avoids any linkages that indi cate belonging, which is to say a relation that determines the object. 
So he steers clear of prepositions like of, within, from, against, for, and with.

Nevertheless some prepositions, contrary to their grammatical role, tend to obscure the object's determination in favor of a linkage of nonrelation. Such nonrelational linkages are often structures of parallelism in which two entities remain separate and nonequal even as they are brought 
together. Two entities might persist in parallel without ever exchanging anything, or their parallelism might be so radically and rigorously superimposed that, counterintuitively, they achieve mutual immanence. Prep-ositions useful to embody such structures include in, as, by, according to, 
alongside, and without.So with little anxiety Laruelle will speak of things like given- without- 
givenness, vision- in- One, or thinking according to the real even as he hedges with parenthetical  expressions like force (of) vision. Similar to 
Hermes, the  chaperone god who runs alongside travelers as they ven- ture into foreign lands, Laruelle seeks a parallelism or accompaniment. 
But such parallelism is a nonrelation in which no mutual exchange or correspondence transpires between the parties in question. In this sense 
Laruelle seeks relation without exchange.This is why we might describe the one as autistic. Of course, this is  
not to pathologize autism, much less to pathologize the one. This is not to  insinuate  some  new  kind  of  neuro- normativity  into  the  conversa- 
tion.  On  the  contrary,  if  anything  Laruelle's  autism  should  convince  us that cognitive  norms are  something of a fraud, just as Deleuze and 
Guattari's use of the term schizophrenia was meant to overturn the apple cart of what healthy subjects were thought to be. To label Laruelle's theory of relation as autistic is simply to point out that the one is, as it were, non- normative  in  its  relationships.  Like  the  autist  who  does  not  form 
relation ships using the typical linking techniques of language, object ori-entation, or eye contact, the one does not establish a relation with the 
clone, and in fact is not even party to the act of cloning because nothing of the one is advanced or synthesized during cloning. This is why the one 
requires such a radical rethinking of the preposition, and why the one has very little use for relation, at least in the way relation is commonly 
construed.4

    27 26/08/2014   5:06:10 PM

!8  The Standard Model

Without relation, without exchange, without many prepositional ar-rangements, a basic thesis emerges: the one has no epithets. The one lacks 
quali!cation conferred through aspects, adjectives, monikers, or titles.5"The  One  is  like  a  substance- without- attributes,"  writes  Laruelle, 
momentarily adopting the Spinozist vocabulary of substance and attri-bute.

6 The one is indecisive vis- a`- vis the epithets of being. It quite simply 

has no opinion about them. The one is not a "suspension" of epithetal attribution, because there is nothing to suspend. Rather, the one occupies the a priori position vis- a`- vis both the epithets and the conditions of possibility for any epithet whatsoever.

But  what  is  an  epithet?  An  epithet  is  an  aspect  of  appearing.  Given  the nature of being, multiple epithets will surround the same appearing 
being. An epithet is a way of speaking, and therefore an epithet is a way of speaking Being according to the one (univocity).

This  speaking  is  not  grounded  on  a  principle  of  pure  di)erence  or assemblage, such that each epithet is an isolated singularity, equally removed from each and every other aspect. In fact, an epithet demonstrates that the attributes of an entity can be rooted in a principle of aspective 
di)erence even while the elemental appearance of the entity (a being) is rooted in a principle of identity (a being the Same). Each epithet speaks 
di)erence through the singularity of the same Being. In this way epithets present multiple aspects of an entity while remaining univocal vis- a`- vis 

the appearing of the being.The epithet follows none of the logic of the normal connective grammars like dative, genitive, or accusative. The epithet is never a question of being to or being for. The epithet is, but only because it is as. In other 
words,  an  epithet  speaks  the  aspects  of  a  being  by  saying  "It  is  as." Hermes  only  appears  as  Hermes  Diaktoros  or  as  Hermes  Dolios,  just  
as  water  only  appears  as  ice  or  as  liquid.  Philosophers  call  this  the  as- structure: something appears as something else.

An epithet is an aspect of appearing, which means it pertains to the phenomena and thus to  phenomenology. Yet it is not a predicate, and 
thus does not participate in the system of predication. This means that, in withdrawing from the system of additive predication, an epithet is neither "analytic" nor "synthetic," to use the Kantian vocabulary. Following Spinoza instead, one might call it "attributive." In the language of Marx, 
an  epithet  is  called  a  "form  of  appearance."  Appearing  as  one  epithet 

    28 26/08/2014   5:06:10 PM

  The Standard Model  !9
rather than another represents attributes of the same body, not additive descriptions attached to a body.

To repeat, the one has  no epithets, for it is  insufficient to  itself. But worldly being is always given in specific modes that are sufficient unto 
themselves. Hence being is always attributed, which is to say it is always given  as  and  with  an  epithet.  Being  given  means  "being  as."  Being  is  
an  epithetal  mode  (an  attributed  suficientcy),  while  the  one  is  a  non- epithetal mode (a non- attributed insuficientcy). Being is appropriate, as 
Heidegger says; and hence by contrast, as Henry says, the one is, merely and modestly, proper. To live within presence means to appropriate in an 
appropriate way, but to withdraw from presence means an inappropri-ateness of the merely proper.

Thesis V on the epithets: (B) the epithets of being are fourfold. As stated in Thesis II, the modes of being are equally riven. Now it is possible to 
consider these modes more explicitly. As any student of philosophy can attest, it is bewildering to read the great thinkers, particularly when they 
appear to disagree on so many issues, not least of which being the funda-mental  nature  of  things.  Is  the  world  metaphysically  riven,  following 
Plato?  Or  immanent,  following  Spinoza?  Do  contradiction  and  alien-ation drive history, following Hegel and Marx? Or is the world the result 
of an a*rmative creativity, following Deleuze?But must we choose? Why not simply shoot the moon and assent to  
a  whole  series  of  these  claims  simultaneously?  Following  the  example  of Heidegger, who described a "historicity of being" in which ostensibly 
di)erent philosophers ultimately ventriloquize the same truth of being modi!ed  accordingly  through  history,  can  we  not  also  propose  a  co- 
present, multimodal being that accommodates most if not all the possi-ble scenarios of being- given?

7

Many have described the di)erent materializations of the as- structure: an essence appears as a particular thing (Plato), concrete human labor 

appears as exchange- value (Marx), and so on. Many have counted and classi!ed the various aspects of being. We do not risk cosmological speculation and claim that the as- structure is in!nite, as Spinoza said of the attributes of substance. Nor is there any reason to limit ourselves to two 
or  one,  or  any  other  magical  number.  Here  we  explore  four  modes  of Being, through four epithets.

    29 26/08/2014   5:06:10 PM

3;  The Standard Model

Are  these  the  special  four?  Do  they  claim  exclusive  rights?  Perhaps not. Being is by de!nition the condition of historical being and hence 
has a historicity. It would be a mistake to anoint these four as the four absolute modes of being. These are simply the four modes of being that 
hold sway most powerfully now and within the context of the present conversation.  If  they  are  special,  they  are  special  simply  because  they 
appear.  The  following  four  modes  are  o)ered  not  as  the  last  word  on attributed being, or even the first, simply the most appropriate for today.

Each mode displays a di)erent interpretation of the standard model. Each resolves, or fails to resolve, the standard model in its own particular 
way. Each bears an epithet. Each conditions the world through specific regimes of sense. Each has its own special physics, its own special theory 
of the event, and its own special matheme.As a first step, it is possible heuristically to present the fourfold as four 
quadrants arrayed around two perpendicular axes. The first axis is the axis of a*rmation and negation. The second is the axis of immanence 
and transcendence.
  Transcendental  Transcendental  as a*rmation  as negation

  Immanence  Immanence
  as a*rmation  as negation

A"rmation here means the realm of positivity. It is a sacred realm, a realm devoted to the enchantment of things. Raw a*rmation is visible  

in Foucault's discussions of power as puissance, or Deleuze's descriptions of  creative  becoming  as  a  purely  additive  process.  Likewise  the  poetic 
mysticism of being, evident in Heidegger, is evidence of a rudimentary a*rmation. And Marx's description of the inexhaustibly generative nature 
of labor is also a question of ontological a*rmation.A*rmation leverages the a*rmative operator, written either in terms 
of incrementation as x++ or x + $, or as the absolute value operator |x|, the operator that removes the sign of negation. Through such operations, 
a*rmation reinforces the positive, productive presence of entities.Negation  has  its  own  genealogy.  Marx  too  trades  in  negation,  borrowing his contradiction engine from Hegel, with a renewed devotion to the darkly generative powers of the negation of the negation. Negation is 

    30 26/08/2014   5:06:10 PM

  The Standard Model  3:
not positive, but critical. It is not sacred, but profane. It seeks not to re- enchant the world, but to disenchant it, to shatter illusions, to denaturalize mysti!cations.For  negation  consider  Bataille's  concept  of  unemployed  negativity. 
Consider the movement of subtraction in the work of Badiou. Or con-sider Tiqqun's concept of civil war, a condition of pure agitation in which 
processes of social transformation arise strictly from the relentless fric-tion between various warring factions.

Negation  leverages  the  negative  operator, written  either  in  terms  of decrementation  as  x--  or  x  -  $,  or  via  a  multiplicative  inversion  of 
valence (x * -$).Laruelle o)ers the following useful de!nition of immanence and transcendence: "We call radical  immanence . . . the  element to  which any-thing whatsoever may be added or taken away without changing the fact 
of its immanence. And transcendence . . . the element for which adding or  taking  away  compels  a  complete  reworking  of  what  is  divided  and 
undivided  from  it,  a  complete  shift  in  its  truth."8  Note,  however,  the slight irony in Laruelle's de!nition. He modi!es the typical way in which 
philosophers de!ne the transcendental, as "the thing that doesn't change while weathering all change." In Laruelle we must understand the transcendental as essential or sufficient, and immanence (or the generic) as inessential or insufficient. In other words, essence is the thing that cannot 
be meddled with without altering it; yet the generic may be plied and re-vamped endlessly without a single change. The reason is that the generic 
is, essentially, nothing, or as close to nothing as it is possible to be while still remaining "something." Here Badiou helps shed light on Laruelle: 
the generic is an "essence" but of the void only; generic immanence is an "essence of the void," the thing that is "at the edge of the void."

9

In this way, the transcendental refers to an entity's essential relationship with itself as it persists. Moreover the transcendental provides the conditions of possibility for persistence as such and, by extension, relation as such.  In  other  words,  what  allows  an  entity  to  persist  as  it  is,  without 
vanishing or losing its own identity as itself, is the transcendental quality of the entity. Likewise what allows an entity to enter into relationships, 
either with itself or with other entities, is its transcendental quality. This is not to say that all entities must have a soul or an essence, simply that if 
an entity relates or persists it may be labeled transcendental. In this way 

    31 26/08/2014   5:06:10 PM

3!  The Standard Model
the transcendental is a question not of immanence ("remaining within," from manere) but of emanation ("(owing out," from manare): an entity 
(ows out of itself when it enters into relation, and likewise it (ows out of itself only to meet and replenish itself again when it persists. The transcendental thus in no way prohibits change; persistence and relation have nothing to do with stasis. Quite the opposite, change is possible only via 
the (intransigent) transcendental.Immanence too has its own genealogy, which can be framed in contradistinction to that of the transcendental. The three most developed theo-ries of immanence in contemporary times come from Deleuze, Henry, 
and Laruelle, but the tradition of immanence goes back much further to Spinoza and beyond.

In rejecting both metaphysics and the dialectic, Deleuze describes a plane of immanence in which matter has no need to go outside of itself 
in order to actualize itself. (Whereas in metaphysics matter is actualized only  through  the  outtering  of  essence  into  instance,  and  in  dialectics 
matter  is  actualized only  through a process  of negation, and  therefore externalization, along the lines of self/other.)

Henry goes in a slightly di)erent direction, avoiding Deleuze's "democ-racy of immanence" that grants immanence to an aggregate of pure multiplicities. Instead Henry proposes that immanence, if it is understood correctly, must lead  to an examination not of an aggregated plane but  
of a singleton. Because of this Henry focuses on the immanence of one thing, the only thing knowable, the Ego, and as a result he produces a 
pure immanence of the self. Instead of examining the exterior manifesta-tion of things, as other phenomenologists do, Henry turns inward to an 
internal manifestation of the interior life of the self. "More original than the truth of Being," he writes, "is the truth of man."

10 Thus Henry arrives 

at the concept of immanent revelation, which he considers to be more fundamental than Hegel's concept of manifestation.

Such a solution is not rigorous enough to satisfy Laruelle, who does not simply submit a single philosophical practice, that of phenomenology, to the rule of immanence, as Henry does. Rather, Laruelle subjects the entire practice of philosophy to the axiom of immanence. If Henry's 
is an immanence that evacuates the outside, and hence must always be understood against a phenomenological stance rooted in space and time, 
Laruelle's  is  an  immanence  that  evacuates  the  suficientcy  of  ontology, 

    32 26/08/2014   5:06:10 PM

  The Standard Model  33
itself  understood  against  a  philosophical  stance  rooted  in  the  various logics of being (appearance, manifestation, and so on).

By this token Laruelle's immanence is an immanence within methodol-ogy-- a rather startling and unprecedented undertaking to be sure-- not 
simply an immanence of nature (Spinoza, Deleuze) or an immanence of the self (Fichte, Henry). So, when certain critics claim that Laruelle is a 
Kantian, what they really mean is that, in the fashion of Kant but without parroting  him,  Laruelle  is  performing  heavy  surgery  on  philosophical 
method as such, not simply making this or that claim about nature or humanity.

The two perpendicular axes given earlier, transcendental- immanent and a*rmation- negation, contain their own set of force !elds and vector transformations. The forces along the vertical axis are the forces of distinction  and  integration.  To  follow  a  vector  from  immanence  into 
transcendence is to follow the vector of distinction or digitization, to divide from  one  into  two.  But  moving  in  the  opposite  direction,  to  follow  a  
vector  from  transcendence  into  immanence  is  to  follow  the  vector  of integration or analogicity, to superimpose as one.

The forces along the horizontal axis, by contrast, are the forces of con-secration and profanation. The force !eld that moves from a*rmation 
into negation is a force of profanation in which hitherto associated enti-ties are uncoupled and dissociated. Captured well by the double meaning 
of words like splicing or cleaving, this vector involves the simultaneous actions  of  both  cutting  and  rejoining.  Hence  it  is  a  vector  of  divorce- 
ment or rivenning. Profanation uncouples two entities only to bind them together again in an unbreakable uncoupling.

In counter transit to profanation is the vector of consecration moving from negation to a*rmation. Along this path are the acts of association 
and connection. Belonging and appropriation are also acts of consecra-tion, as are the acts of mixing (as opposed to separating) and interfacing 
(as opposed to defacing). Being still remains inescapably riven of course. Yet along the vector of consecration lies an irresistible impetus driving 
things away from their rivenness toward communion.These  two  basic  axes  produce  a  fourfold  space  for  the  epithets  of 
being.  It  is  possible  to  assign  proper  names  to  the  four  quadrants:  (") transcendental a*rmation refers to the One Two of di)erential being, 
(-) transcendental negation refers to the Not- One of dialectical being, 

    33 26/08/2014   5:06:10 PM

34  The Standard Model
(.)  immanent  a*rmation  refers  to  the  One- as- Multiple  of  continuous being,  and  (/)  immanent  negation  refers  to  the  One- and- the- Same  of 
generic being.After amending the previous table the four quadrants now appear as 
follows:
  Di)erential being  Dialectical being  or "One Two"  or "Not- One"

  (transcendental as a*rmation)  (transcendental as negation)
  Continuous being  Generic being  or "One- as- Multiple"  or "One- and- the- Same"
  (immanence as a*rmation)  (immanence as negation)

Not all four modes of being are equal in stature vis- a`- vis the real base of  the  supernature.  There  are  modes  that  are  nearer  to  the  base,  and 
modes that are further from it. There are modes that cling to the super-nature. There are other modes that (ee the real base, only to consummate a new kind of supernatural intimacy, even at a distance. There are still  other  modes  that revel  in  the  rivenness  of their own  being- given, 
unapologetic that nature acts in the way it does.For this reason the One Two of di)erential being is de!ned first, because 
it lies at a slight remove from the real, although it is not the most remote. The One- and- the- Same of generic being is de!ned last because it is the 
closest to the real, as close as is possible to get while remaining riven.11
(#) The One Two of di$erential being. In the opening pages of Principles of Non- philosophy, Laruelle de!nes the philosophical decision in terms 
of what he calls a "-/. matrix." In such a matrix two terms come together to form a third synthetic term. For this reason philosophy is fundamentally "in a state of lack with itself," because it must come face to face with something else that exists in opposition or counterdistinction to it. Self 
and  world  make  -,  establishing  a  relation  of  solicitude  or  orientation, which in turn is synonymous with the philosophical decision as .. Or in 
an equivalent but inverted sense, philosophy will also tend to adopt a ./- matrix, because of its own irrepressible vanity, wherein philosophy begins 
"in excess of itself " as ., and thus insinuates relationships of representation (the -) into every nook and cranny.

12

    34 26/08/2014   5:06:10 PM

  The Standard Model  35

Such is the classic de!nition of metaphysics, not simply any old inves-ti gation into first principles, but a very specific stance on the construction  of  the  universe  in  which  the  cleaving  of  the  one  is  reorganized around  an  essential  twoness  rooted  in  di)erence.  This  is  true  just  as 
much for Plato as it is for Heidegger, Derrida, or Badiou. The twoness  of di)erence might be  as simple as adjudicating the  authentic  and the 
inauthentic life. It might refer to the di)erence between self and world, or self and other.

In this way, metaphysics leads to a kind of staccato being in that it dif-ferentiates and detaches God from humanity, creation from the created, 
life from the living, and the sacred from the profane. The specific form of staccato being is the binarism; the generic form of staccato being is 
digitality (shared too by dialectical being, as we shall see in a moment). The specific form di)erentiates and detaches all from nothing, one from 
zero, man from woman. The generic form describes the basic conditions of possibility for making distinctions as such, and therefore the possibility of di)erence and di)erentiation.Important passwords for di)erential being are particle, sphere, binarism, detachment, digitality, and di#erence. Under the modal condition of the  One  Two,  being  goes  outside  of  itself  into  di)erence.  The  state  of 
rivenness is not elided or ignored. Neither is it fueled and accelerated. It is ossi!ed as it is. Rivenness is not given over as a force vector or "line of 
(ight," nor is it resolved through synthesis. One could think of this as a fetishization of digitization, in  the  Marxian sense, to the extent that it 
seizes upon the relationality of digitization and injects a type of illusory value into the basic fact of distinction.

Rooted in di)erence and representation, the One Two of di)erential being is at home in the company of the transcendental. It is quite comfortable  with  the  metaphysical relation.  It is,  in  fact, the  philosophical stage  par  excellence.  Aesthetics  is  also  typically  found  here-- although 
not exclusively, as we will see in chapters + and %. Likewise the One Two of di)erential being is the domain in which morality best (ourishes, for 
having  been  endowed  with  the  possibility  of  discrimination,  the  One Two considers all events in terms of the morality of the law. This is why 
metaphysicians can speak of the di)erence between essence and instance in terms of morality. Under this framework, the moral entity is de!ned 
as the entity that conforms most closely with its essence.

    35 26/08/2014   5:06:10 PM

36  The Standard Model
(%) The Not- One of dialectical being. If the One Two is a kind of positive dialectics or a dialectics of positivity, the Not- One of dialectical being is 
best  understood  as  negative  di)erence  and  hence  truly  a  dialectics  of negation.

"In the Dialectical stage," Hegel writes in the lesser Logic, "!nite char-acterizations or formulae supersede themselves, and pass into their opposites."13 In similar fashion Marx describes a number of di)erent dialectical relationships, including the union of use- value and exchange- value within 
the commodity and the relationship between concrete and abstract labor. Dialectical  being  functions  through  direct  and  continual  negation  in  
the form of opposition or critique. If in the previous mode twoness was fetishized for its own sake, here twoness is understood not as a positivity 
of two but as a negativity of not one. The one and the not one form a new twin.  So  while  previously  the  binarism  held  sway  (man/woman,  self/
other), now the binarism has been profaned. It still exists as two, only it has lost its e)ervescence as an abstract, incorruptible binary. The dialectic pays homage to no one. There are no permanent categories, no grand narratives to sculpt the formation of the two.

The Not- One is thus a form of disenchanted being in which entities emerge and disappear through structures of contingency and metamorphosis.  Malabou's  plasticity is,  in  this  sense, following  Hegel, the  con-sum mate organon of dialectical being. The same is true for stasis in the 

work  of  Tiqqun.  Dialectical  being  forever  establishes  relationships  of antagonism, be they logical or political, in which entities or groups are 
formed and pitted against other entities or groups. And although such antagonisms can and will be resolved locally and historically, the essential archi tecture of antagonism itself persists eternally within dialectical being.

The passwords of dialectical being are point and position, thesis, argu-ment, resistance, critique, faction and factionalization, struggle, counterpoint, 
and opposition. Dialectical being requires an intransigent immiscibility, but also mutual corruption and synthesis.

At root, dialectical entities are not particles but points. Unlike di)er-ential being they do not establish a local !eld bound by terminal transitions into and out of other states. Rather they occupy a point within space, de!ned exclusively by coordinates without extension or volume. 
They are a point within a !eld, measured against another location in the 

    36 26/08/2014   5:06:10 PM

  The Standard Model  37
!eld. In this way, the rivenness of the dialectic leads to a harmonic being, a tone entity that resonates only in counterpoint to another tone. Under 
the modal condition of the Not- One, being is a semi- entity within a pro-cession of translation and recon!guration across an expanding !eld of 
time and space.As a transcendental mode of the law, dialectical being is the realm of 
the workaday event. It is the normal way in which things happen, subse-quent to the changes precipitated by action, reaction, stress, and force. 
The Not- One is not the only way to be political, but certainly it's one of the most common and prevalent political mechanics. Through position 
and negation, dialectical being mobilizes the law as political. Thus, just as the law provides a legal infrastructure for the management of bodies 
and behaviors, dialectical being manages the appearance, disappearance, and transmutation of entities.

(&) The One- as- Multiple of continuous being. Di)erential and dialectical being are both rooted in the transcendental. As such they appeal to the 
law,  either  in  the  form  of  a  moral  imperative  or  a  political  dynamic. Across these realms is found the Father and the Prince, the law and the 
commandment.  These  realms  have  been  incredibly  powerful  histori-cally, yet have changed in recent years because of sustained critiques of 
the transcendental. Such critiques have come from both the left and the right; they target things like hierarchy, repression, and social exclusion, 
as well as more exotic maladies such as logocentrism and ontotheology.So now leave the realm of the transcendental and enter the realm of 
immanence. The One- as- Multiple achieves immanence by way of multi-plicity and continuity. It is best understood as a "natural" immanence, or 
an "immanence of everything." Shunning the repressive laws of di)er-ence, continuous  being a*rms  any and  all entities as  participants  and 
grants them an open invitation to the multiplicity of the world.Hence  nature,  for  thinkers  like  Deleuze,  is  at  root  a  smooth  aggregation  of  heterogenous  entities,  all  on  equal  footing  within  a  material substratum.  Crystals  grow,  and  animals  procreate.  Elements  catalyze 
chemical reactions just as nations surge together in battle. Each entity is a heterogenous singularity. But taken as a whole, they constitute a single 
plane  of  being,  the  plane  of  immanence,  broad,  (at,  and  continuous. There  is  no  vacuum  in  a  Deleuzian  universe,  no  absence  or  lack,  no 

    37 26/08/2014   5:06:10 PM

38  The Standard Model
unconscious, no repression, no binarisms like self/other or man/woman, only variations in intensity, !elds of attraction and repulsion, local crystallizations of material habit and corruptions of structure leading to dis-solution  and  subsequent  recombination.  Deleuzian  immanence  is  an 
immanence at the level of ontology. Nature is immanent to itself; it does not need to go outside itself in order to realize itself.

The generic is therefore not unknown to Deleuze. But he locates the generic  at  the  level  of  the  totality.  This  is  why  continuous  being  is  an 
"immanence of everything." Its totality is a "whatever totality"; any and all or whatever.

Here the one reappears not as the singleton but as the universe, not  an entity in its finitude but the in!nite undulations of the Earth. Deleuze's 
One is always a One All. Collectivity, for Deleuze, is a question of the totality of matter and the totality of physical processes. Deleuze is thus 
properly labeled a physicist, not a metaphysicist. His philosophy is that  of physics and sensation, empiricism and  aestheticism,  not things  like 
essence or teleology or truth. But while dialectical being achieves totality via negation, continuous being achieves totality via a*rmation.

The passwords of continuous being are terms like integration, multi-plicity, wave, attractor, continuum, univocity, analogy, indi#erence, promiscuity,  miscegenation,  hybridity,  mixing,  process,  emergence,  autopoiesis, contagion, intensi!cation, and modulation.

And as Deleuze  and Guattari so rightly pointed out, because of the propensity  for  multiplication  and  parallelization,  the  chief  malady  for 
continuous being is the "split mind" of schizophrenia (not fetishization, as was evident previously for di)erential metaphysics), as the traditional 
linkages among thought, emotion, and behavior break down and are re-placed with various kinds of mental fragmentation. In the face of such 
developments Deleuze and Guattari made a virtue of necessity by advo-cating a new kind of schizophrenic subject-- not uncontroversial in some 
circles-- based in metastatic existence, the multiplication of a)ects, and the proliferation of desires.

"To  reverse  Platonism," Deleuze  remarked,  "is  first  and  foremost to remove essences and to substitute events in their place, as jets of singularities."14 Admittedly it is incorrect on the face of things to call Deleuze a theologian. But the vitality of pure matter that he describes; his obvious 

love for Spinoza's God- Nature; the One All that he credits also to Duns 

    38 26/08/2014   5:06:10 PM

  The Standard Model  39
Scotus  and  Nietzsche:  these  things  point  to  an  underlying  mystico- theological core within Deleuze's world. Is it new age mysticism, a weird 
twist on neoplatonism, or simply garden variety vitalism? Regardless of the answer, continuous being will tend toward a sacred, enchanted, if not 
entirely theological explanation for things.These  "jets  of  singularities"  that  surge  and  shoot,  these  counter- 
Platonic  non- essences,  are  pure  events.  Continuous  being  is,  in  this sense,  the  converse  of  dialectical  being.  They  both  locate  the  event  at  
the  core  of  things,  making  events  the  very  building  blocks  of  all  exis-tence. Yet although the dialectic proceeds through a chain of negation, 
formulating dynamic oppositions in series, continuous being proceeds immanently via inductive, emergent a*rmation. So Badiou is ultimately 
correct to pounce on the "clamor" in Deleuze's being. Deleuze's events are these never- ending clamorous occasions. They happen all the time, 
and everywhere. In fact, for continuous being, the world is nothing but such clamorous occasions.

Entities become less important, while processes more important. For the  One- as- Multiple  of  continuous  being,  the  universe  is  no  longer 
divided up into objects so much as nexuses of relation, forever ebbing and (owing in and out of equilibrium. The law, the commandment, and 
other grand structures start to fade from view, to be replaced by com-mon  convention.  Indeed  both  continuous  and  generic  being  shun  the 
law  in  favor  of  the  immanent  mode  of  practice.  Yet  although  practice may  pertain  to  both  things  and  nature,  continuous  being  (for  which 
Deleuze is the exemplar) places practice ultimately in the lap of nature. So while Deleuze and Guattari sing beautifully of the nomad with its war 
machine, or the child who hums a tune to fend o) the dark, their most reverent  words  are  saved  for  the  strata  of  the  Earth,  which  Deleuze 
describes so mystically as "the primary order which grumbles beneath."15In this way, continuous being renounces metaphysics in favor of legato 
being, in which an undivided continuum of smooth, (owing aggregates attach (uidly to themselves across space, bounding into the unbroken 
continuum of time.
(')  The  One- and- the- Same  of  generic  being.  For  Badiou,  philosophy consists in thinking the generic as such. Philosophy consists in thinking 
the elemental condition of subtractive being, in which the specificities of 

    39 26/08/2014   5:06:10 PM

4;  The Standard Model
discrete entities, including the apparatuses required to mold and main-tain them as discrete entities, are dissolved in favor of a newfound agnostic totality of the particular entity.If  continuous  being  approaches  immanence  at  the  scale  of  nature, 
generic being approaches immanence at the scale of the person. If con-tinuous being is thus ultimately a question of the a*rmative in!nity of 
nature, generic being is ultimately a meditation on the finitude of com-mon existence and experience.

This  is  why  Laruelle  can  speak  of  an  immanence  that  is  !nite  (as opposed to an immanent infinitude, which can only ever resemble God 
or some God proxy such as nature or the absolute). Likewise it is why Badiou can speak of truth, not in terms of grand overarching absolutes, 
but  in  terms  of  the  generic  !delity  to  truth  furnished  to  all  persons. Hence the label One- and- the- Same: it a*rms the  generic sameness of 
unadorned personhood; it a*rms the oneness evident in raw common-ality. Here is Badiou:

What we know about inventive politics at least since "+#., when it exists, is 
that it can only be egalitarian and non- Statist, tracing, in the historic and 
social thick, humanity's genericity, the deconstruction of strata, the ruin of 
di)erential or hierarchical representations and the assumption of a communism of singularities. What we know about poetry is that it explores  
an unseparated, non- instrumental language, o)ered to everyone, a voice 
founding the genericity of speech itself. What we know about the matheme is that it seizes the multiple stripped of every presentative distinction, 
the genericity of multiple- being. What we know about love, at last, is that 
beyond the encounter, it declared its !delity to the pure Two it founds and 
makes generic truth of the fact that there are men and women. Philosophy 
today is the thinking of the generic as such.16

In Badiou the generic revolves around these four truth procedures: poli-tics,  art,  science,  and  love.  Politics  illuminates  a  generic  humanity; 
poetry,  a  generic  language;  mathematical  science,  a  generic  multiple; love, a generic miracle of an intimacy that is "ours."

But Badiou does not exhaust the sources of the generic, and we are not obligated to think about generic being strictly in these terms. Laruelle mentions in particular Feuerbach's rupture with Hegel and his endorsement 

    40 26/08/2014   5:06:10 PM

  The Standard Model  4:
of "generic man," as part of a longer tradition of "minor or minoritarian thinkers":

Hamann  (against  Kant),  Jacobi  (against  Fichte),  Eschenmayer  (against 
Schelling),  the  Young  Hegelians  up  to  Stirner,  and  fully  realized  with 
Kierkegaard (against Hegel). A single key feature unites all these !gures: 
how to break with philosophy, with its systematic nature, in the name of passion, faith, feeling? in the name of actually existing religious individuals? 
in the name of non- philosophy?17

At the intersection of both immanence and negativity, generic being operates through a subtractive logic. If dialectical being deploys the negative in the service of transcendental transformation (the persistence of the party through struggle, the persistence of spirit through actualization,  and  so  on),  generic  being deploys the  negative  as  a kind  of  pure bunker  for  thought.  The  One- and- the- Same  hunkers  down  within 
immanence; its negativity is not that of negation, resistance, or opposi-tion,  but  of  solitude,  absence,  peace,  and  love.  If  the  dialectic  is  an 
instance of provisional negation, the generic is an instance of pure nega-tion.  Its  passwords  are  oblivion,  withdrawal,  subtraction,  nothingness, 
commonality, something, whatever, equality, disappearance, exodus, and the impersonal.

Both Badiou and  Deleuze have  written on the generic.  But perhaps the most well- developed theories of generic being come from Henry and 
Laruelle.  If  Deleuze  and  Guattari  wrote  about  the  dangers  and  a)or-dances  of  a  schizophrenic  immanence,  Henry  and  Laruelle  gravitate 
instead to what I've been calling an autistic immanence. Their concern is not so much the fragmentation or multiplicity of the subject but a purely 
autonomous  entity  that  need  not  go  outside  itself  in  order  to  realize itself, not so much an unbridled proliferation of relation running to and 
fro within the subject but a static parallelism consisting of the one and the  person  in  superposition.  "We  must  radicalize  the  Two  (after  first 
radicalizing  the  One),"  writes  Laruelle.  "The  generic  shall  be  the  Two (eeced of its totality or system."

18

Indeed,  generic  being  summons  not  so  much  an  "immanence  of everything,"  as  with  continuous  being,  but  an  "immanence  of  something." Deleuze's immanence of everything views the plane of being as a 

    41 26/08/2014   5:06:10 PM

4!  The Standard Model
space of endless multiplicity. But an immanence of something redirects focus from the plane to the entity, be it a person or the one itself. These 
something- entities are no longer elongated horizontally, like the subter-ranean o)shoots of the rhizome, but instead persist modestly and !nitely 

without di)erential multiplicity. Generic  being  is  generic  in its  imma-nence. Not so much a generic totality, but a generic particularity. Not a 
generic in!nity, but a generic finitude.So while formerly the rivenness of being was resolved by proliferating 
such rivenness into endless repetitions of di)erence, here the rivenness of  being  is  resolved  by  pretending  it  never  happened:  the  fundamental 
cleavage is not repeated or rehearsed, it is not fetishized or ossi!ed, and it is not reduplicated or multiplied; rather, the fundamental cleavage is 
deprived of itself and dissolved into a new state of impoverishment.Like the three previous modes of the standard model, generic being 
has its own theory of the event. Instead of politics, morality, or theology, the generic event is understood as ethical practice. The generic is a lived 
relation, and therefore de!ned as an ethos. It follows no explicit goal and is subservient to no state of a)airs, and is thus rooted strictly in practice. 
Practice may be the practice of nature, but it can also be, as it is here, the practice of entities themselves.

But this is an ethos of negation, not a*rmation. The slogan now is not "Liberate your desires," as it was with continuous being. The new slogan 
for  generic  being  is  "We  have  no  demands"  or  "Withdraw,  and  leave being behind." The mission is no longer to identify and legitimate new 
subject  positions,  as  in  the  socially  visible  monikers  of  woman,  prole-tarian, queer, and so on, but to slough o) the very apparatus of subject 
formation  that  obliges  a  person  to  assume  such  a  position.  Yet  even  then, through the very rejection of subject formation, the generic being 
achieves a generalized woman, a generalized proletarian, or a general-ized queer.

In this way, we should speak not of a staccato being, nor a harmonic, or legato being, but a quiescent being, a mode of living that grows quieter 
and quieter with each passing day, even as it passes more fully into what-ever it is. Its virtues are rarely those of liberation-- more like withdrawal, 
abstinence,  or  discipline,  that  same  discipline  that  has  today  been  so thoroughly  discounted  and  demoralized  by the  forces  of liberation,  in 
everything from May "#$% to capitalism itself.

    42 26/08/2014   5:06:11 PM

  The Standard Model  43

Instead of the queer consumer, generic being produces something like a queer communism, in which the absence of a shared essential nature 
serves, perhaps ironically, as the common infrastructure for a new ethi-cal life. Within generic being, therefore, the goal is not to liberate a)ect; 
the goal is to starve and suppress it. The self must not be granted new access to representation, new access to the metaphysical apparatus, but 
rather  the  self  must  decline  such  access.  Thoroughly  monastic  in  its structure, generic being nevertheless achieves a more profound sublimity: love in  an  intimacy unbound by fetish; a  body in  balance  with an energy never wasted or exploited; communion through the absolute suspension of violence against the other; the self- revelation of being as some-thing, whatever it is.

The standard model as illumination, obscurity, brightness, and encryp-tion.  The  four  quadrants  of  the  standard model  also  house  a  series  of 
representational and aesthetic operators. Although such themes are dis-cussed with greater detail in chapter +, it is worth outlining them here. 
They  include  the  various  intensities  of  illumination  and  obscurity,  of light to dark and white to black.

First, the essence of di)erential being is illumination. It is the domain of  enlightenment  knowledge  and  transparent  if  not  also  transcendent 
bodies. Di)erential being appears as a brightening, as bright light. It is found  in what the  ancients  called  lumen, or light as  illumination. It is 
also what Heidegger means when he speaks of being as a ground that creates  a  "clearing"  or  opening, from  which  the  light  of  presence  may 
shine forth. Di)erential being requires that things be cast ahead, as when rays of light are cast ahead to light a world, or as when the human sensorium, acting as an illumination proxy, casts its orientation and solicitude into a lit world.

By contrast the essence of dialectical being is impenetrable obscurity. Although it proliferates local enclaves of visibility, it is bound ultimately 
to the dark and !nds its fuel there. A dark body is a body frozen in habit or cliche'; interrupt the body via synthesis or mutation and it will move, 
alighting elsewhere as a newly encrypted and clandestine faction within the dialectical chain.

Further still, the essence of continuous being is full brightness. So total in its illumination, continuous being supersedes the light- dark continuum 

    43 26/08/2014   5:06:11 PM

44  The Standard Model
entirely,  becoming  the  pure  light  of  lux.  Strictly  speaking,  continuous being is no longer light at all, but white. It is too full to be visible, and 
hence remains opaque despite being bathed in light. Such hyper- white is the whiteness of pure opacity.

And !nally, the most obscure of all, the super- obscure black of generic being absorbs all light in an irreversible vacuum of visibility. Instead of 
mere  ontic  darkness,  generic  being  achieves  an  ontological  darkness, and hence beckons toward the kind of crypto- ontology of pure blackness 
evident in Laruelle.
One- as- Multiple  Plane  White  Practice as theological
One Two  World  Bright  Law as moral
Not- One  Point  Dark  Law as political
One- and- the- Same  Nothing  Black  Practice as ethical

Indeed, at first glance Laruelle seems to resemble the  !nal mode of being, generic being. Yet the precise location of Laruelle within the standard model presents some problems. For, properly speaking, Laruelle is working almost entirely within the realm of the real. Laruelle runs parallel 
to the standard model. Thus, properly speaking, Laruelle's non- standard philosophy is not located anywhere within the fourfold of the standard 
model, even if he uses the fourfold as his base material. His chief concern is the infrastructure, the real base, the supernature, the real, the one-- 
none of which has been given, and thus none of which !nds its home in the standard model.

However, that is simply the most charitable view of Laruelle from the perspective of non- philosophy. To view Laruelle from the perspective of 
philosophy, it is quite natural to make the mistake and locate him under the heading of the One- and- the- Same of generic being. This is a mistake 
on the merits. Yet the indiscretion is easily forgivable.Even  then,  one  might  strive  for  a  more  properly  non- philosophical 
rendering by superpositioning Laruelle within both conditions: the modal condition of generic being, and the non- modal condition of the one. In 
fact non- philosophy proper does not reject philosophy, nor does it strive to exit philosophy in order to live beyond or outside of it. "We who are 
the  experimenters,  engineers,  and  technicians  of  the  Matrix,"  Laruelle 

    44 26/08/2014   5:06:11 PM

  The Standard Model  45
writes of his own profession, we "participate simultaneously in the Last Instance and in philosophy."

19 Thus, from the perspective of philosophy, 

Laruelle most resembles generic being, even if he is ultimately dealing with the real infrastructure of the one and withdrawing from the standard model. In this sense the generic is a kind of gateway, to use a fright-fully philosophical term, that allows the standard model to be rethought 
in parallel as non- standard.Here then is an itemization of Laruelle's basic posture:

--  The  axiomatic  positing  of  an  immanent  and  generic  one,  against  the 

reigning doxa of contemporary philosophy
--  A derivation of the standard model of philosophy in terms of decision or 

distinction
--  The proposal of a non- standard method reliant on indecision, that is, the 

withdrawal from decision

The standard model as philosophical mixture. It is now more di*cult to assess whether or not the generic aspect of non- philosophy is ultimately 
synthetic in the Kantian sense. From one perspective non- philosophy is resolutely not synthetic, because it withdraws from all the various synthetic  logics  such  as  recombination,  ampli!cation,  mixing,  dialectical contradiction,  di)erence,  hybridity,  and  so  on.  Laruelle  says  on  many 
occasions  that  non- philosophy  is  not  additive  vis- a`- vis  the  one.  Thus, using the strict de!nition of synthetic as "containing an additive predicate" the generic aspect of non- philosophy is not additive or ampliative in any way.

Yet although Laruelle's non- standard method is not synthetic in the Kantian  sense,  non- philosophy  is  synthetic  in  a  di)erent  sense-- or  in 
Laruellese a "non- synthesis" or "synthesis- without- synthesizing"-- by vir-tue of the way in which it brings forth non- philosophical axioms out of 
philosophical mixtures (see [Student in Bicycle Bird Costume], the fron-tispiece  of  this  chapter).  Thus  the  various  philosophical  mixtures  of 
Being/other, Being/being, or one/other are set into an identity with the one. The dyads themselves are not merged or deconstructed, but merely 
left intact as data. "Each one of these [dyads] is by and large treated as an a  priori possessing an  identity," explains Laruelle. "For exam ple, ontological di)erence becomes the unilateral duality of Being and being."20 

    45 26/08/2014   5:06:11 PM

46  The Standard Model
So it is at least minimally synthetic in the sense that it contains some-thing  in  the  predicate  (the  unilateral  duality  of  Being  and  being)  not 
already evident in the subject (the philosophy under scrutiny). Yet Laru-elle would ultimately not classify this transformation as additive, because 
the process of cloning philosophical data never produces a combination or mixture in the strict sense. It only produces a clone or dual, which is a 
transcendental identity vis- a`- vis the one and the empirical world of phi-losophy that it unilateralizes.

Herein lies Laruelle's curious use of the a priori. For on the one hand the philosophical chimeras of Being/other, Being/being, and so on are 
taken to be a priori, just as Kant considered time and space to be a priori. But on the other hand Laruelle asserts that these chimeras are themselves 
digital  data:  they  are  given  over  to  non- philosophy  as  a  more  or  less empirical or worldly reality that must be cloned or dualized.

This is further proof of philosophy's promiscuous convertibility. The very  things  that  are  profoundly  "pure  and  necessary"  or  a  priori  vis-  
a`-vis  philosophy-- whether  it  be  Heidegger's  Ereignis  or  Parmenides's simil itude of being and thought-- (ip and reconvert into empirical assets 
that  may  be  measured  according  to  the  methods  of  dualysis  or  clon- ing. The empirical assets of philosophy are translated one into another, 
producing  the  very  idiom  of  non- philosophy.  "Non- philosophy  is  this translation  of  Kant  `in'  Descartes,  of  Descartes  `in'  Marx,  of  Marx  `in' 

Husserl, etc."21Indeed, Laruelle doesn't mince words on the question of mixing: "What 
we shun first and foremost are any kind of transcendental mixtures of the  One  and  the  Two. . . .  The  interplay  of  Idealism  and  Materialism 
presuppose some kind of transcendental operator as means for dividing the One and unifying the Two."

22

Laruelle's  rather  staunch  position  against  hybridity  and  miscegena-tion (me'tissage) puts him at odds with much of post- structuralism and 

postmodern theory, including identity politics and cultural studies. These are all discourses that have, in varying ways, displayed a keen interest in 
hybridity, mixing, excess, supplementarity, and exchange, viewing such processes as useful and productive for both the individual and society at 
large. On this score Laruelle might appear somewhat reactionary. How-ever I hope to show by the end of the book that a parallel concept exists-- 
the generic-- that addresses many of the same concerns voiced by these 

    46 26/08/2014   5:06:11 PM

  The Standard Model  47
various discourses, and indeed addresses them in a way more viable and appropriate to our times.

One,  two,  three,  four-- what  are  the  most  philosophically  important numbers? Heidegger evokes the fourfold; Deleuze and Guattari a thousand (but it could have been more). For Badiou, the multiple plays its role, as does in!nity. For Hegel the triad and the operation of the negative. For Irigaray it is sometimes two, and sometimes not one. For others the binary. For others still the key numerical concept is simply nothing. 
Only  two  numerical  concepts  are  necessary  for  Laruelle:  the  one  and  the dual.

As Laruelle explains, there  is  no synthesis or dialectic of the world, only the one and  its various identities: "In  immanence, one  no longer 
distinguishes between the One and the Multiple, there is no longer any-thing but n = ", and the Multiple- without- All. No manifold watched over 
by a horizon, in (ight or in progress: everywhere a true chaos of (oat- ing or inconsistent determinations . . . between Identity and Multiplicity, 
no synthesis by a third term."23Here is an easy shorthand for remembering some of the !gures already 
discussed. Deleuze is n + $. Badiou is n - $. Laruelle is n = $. Deleuze is the thinker  of  propagation  and  repetition,  of  additive  expression  (never 
nega tive or dialectical expression). For Deleuze, the One is the additive product of pure multiplicity. Hence the plenum is Deleuze's ontological 
terminus.Badiou,  however,  is  a  subtractivist.  The  Badiousian  event  is  never 
counted as part of the situation; it is always subtracted from it, as some-thing apart from being. Hence Badiou's terminus is the void, the absent 
one.Laruelle,  by  contrast,  is  neither  additive  nor  subtractive;  his  opera- 
tor is neither plus nor minus, but equals. Laruelle is the great thinker of radical  equality,  what  he  calls  identity  (from  the  Latin  pronoun  idem 
meaning "the same" or "the very same"). He cares little for the plenum or the  void;  his  terminus  is  identity,  the  one  as  radically  immanent  and 
same without ever having to go outside itself.24In sum, if Paul Ricoeur's "hermeneutics of suspicion" framed critique as 
paranoia, and Deleuze and Guattari painted modern thought as schizo-phrenia, Laruelle renders non- philosophy as autism. Like the autist, we 

    47 26/08/2014   5:06:11 PM

48  The Standard Model
are not neuro- normative in our relations with the real. Abstract philo-sophical concepts do not help much. The one is absolutely foreclosed to 
us. Instead we move alongside it, committed to its sameness, a life "of science and  of the  reality  that  science  can  describe,  naively  in  the  last 
instance."25  If  Deleuze's  heroes  are  Spinoza,  Hume,  and  other  philoso-phers of radical materialism, Laruelle descends from a di)erent line, the 
autistic philosophy of Fichte (I = I) or Henry (ego)."Yes, I am autistic in a certain sense," Laruelle admitted once, with a 
sparkle in his eye. "Like a particle that passes through a mountain."26

    48 26/08/2014   5:06:11 PM

!"#$%&'()%#*+)*+#,*'--.%-)/+%0-'*1%
t h r e e
The Digital

Despite being the object of much discussion today, the digital does not often  appear  in  the  writings  of  philosophers,  except  perhaps  when  it 
arrives unwittingly under the aegis of another name. The world of busi-ness consultancy has accepted it, as has the popular and folk culture, consumer society, telecommunications, medicine, the arts, and, of course, the spheres of electrical engineering and information processing, where 
it plays a special role. But is there an ontology of the digital, or even a philosophy of it?

1

The goal of this chapter is not so much to answer such questions but to draw up a map for what is necessary to answer them, something like a 

prolegomenon for future writing on digitality and philosophy. The goal, then, is not so much to describe a "philosophy of the digital" or even a 
"digitization  of  philosophy"-- the  former  achieving,  at  best,  a  kind  of Kantianism for new media, and the latter enlisting and promoting new 
methods for "doing" philosophy (online or otherwise)-- not so much these things as an exploration in which digitality and philosophy are addressed 
together, as two modal conditions, both in parallel as they diverge and di)erentiate, and also in series as they merge and intermediate. This exploration will, if it is successful, pay attention to the conceptual require-ments of the digital and the analog, and the strictures and a)ordances 
they grant philosophy, without trying to reduce one to the other.Although the terms digital and analog were de!ned provisionally in 
the introduction and have been deployed already thus far, it is now nec-essary to de!ne these terms more specifically and explore them in depth. 

5:

    51 26/08/2014   5:06:11 PM

5!  The Digital
By way of review, let us first rede!ne the digital and the analog, and then explicitly superimpose these de!nitions onto the four quadrants of the 
standard model as de!ned in the previous chapter.
Thesis VI. The digital means the one dividing in two. The heart of the digital lies in metaphysics and its adjacent philosophical systems, most important dialectics. The digital arrives in Western philosophy with Socrates and Plato, for this is the time when dialectical metaphysics experiences 
its most complete original expression.Consider  the  famous  axiom  from  Parmenides's  third  fragment:  the 
same, to think and to be.2 There is nothing digital in that. The one has not divided in two. In fact the opposite is the case. A sameness permeates 
the  categories  of being  and  thinking.  The  axiom  of  Parmenides,  then, could very easily be rewritten as: To think and to be . . . are one.

Yet with Socrates and Plato-- are they one or are they two?-- philoso-phy embarks on a grand multimillennial journey. The one divides in two.

As Socrates warns us in the Phaedrus, the truth of man's sincerity can be externalized into physical objects called the hypomnemata. Such processes of externalization are at root digital, because they extend the one beyond its own bounds, thereby branching the one, splitting it, alienating a part of the one into an external object. Plato, with considerable help from Jacques Derrida  and  more  recently Bernard  Stiegler, described  a 
process of grammatization, in which "the (ows and continuities which weave our existences are discretized: writing, as the discretization of the 
(ow of speech, is a stage of grammatization. . . . Grammatization is the history of the externalization  of memory in  all  its  forms: nervous and 
cerebral memory, corporeal and muscular memory, biogenetic memory."3This is the operation of the digital: the making- discrete of the hitherto 
(uid, the hitherto whole, the hitherto integral. Such making- discrete can be  e)ected via separation, individuation, exteriorization,  extension, or 
alienation. Any process that produces or maintains identity di)erences between  two  or more  elements  can  be  labeled  digital.  This  is  why the 
dialectical metaphysics of Socrates and Plato is so important to the his-tory of the digital, because it establishes essentially for the first time the 
basic categories  of digitization: essence alienated  into instance, speech grammatized into writing, idea extended into matter, memory exteriorized into media, authentic life separated from inauthentic life.

    52 26/08/2014   5:06:11 PM

  The Digital  53

Deleuze is one of the great enemies of dialectical philosophy. He com-pensates for the absence of the dialectic  by introducing an alternation 
between virtualization and actualization. We will have much more to say about virtualization later. But for the moment let us consider actualization. Actualization in Deleuze is a process through which the individual is individuated as such. It connects to the previous comments about integration. Hence actualization is, in strict terms, a process of digitization. Actualization means that the one becomes two; or, if you like, "the One" 
becomes "a one" or "this one," as opposed to "an other." Deleuze also de-scribes the process in terms of territorialization, that is to say, the process 
through which unorganized and uncoded aggregates of things and spaces are !xed and aligned according to specific routines, procedures, regularities, and spatial architectures.In this way a number of terms begin to line up, in Deleuze but also in 
the larger discourse within philosophy pertaining to digitization: actual-ization is a mode of digitization, so too are territorialization, integration, 
alienation, grammatization, exteriorization, separation, and individua-tion, for each describes the moment in which the one becomes the two, 
or "the All" becomes "a one."As discussed in the introduction, !gures like Hegel, Marx, Lenin, and 
Mao are also key entries in any philosophical survey of digitality because of their mutual interest in the dialectic. The same philosophical fuel that 
propelled Plato is evident here too, in the very heart of Hegel's phenom-enology, which considers the foundations of being in terms of an alienation within being, an elemental cleaving that can never be overcome, or perhaps only overcome at the expense of a new cleaving.

Recall  Thesis  II  describing  the  standard  model-- Whatever  given  is riven. This is also Hegel's principle. Whatever is given as part of being  
is always already given over to an elemental rivenness, an elemental dis-tinction, which for Hegel, and his most important student Marx, acts as 
a kind of engine moving things forward. It draws an arrow on time and calls it history.

In Marx, Thesis II is rewritten as class struggle (something like "All being is being in antagonism"). Or in a contemporary !gure like Badiou, 
Thesis II is rewritten as the "theory of points," in which a social whole  is decomposed into two poles (two points), against which the subject is 
compelled to take a position.

    53 26/08/2014   5:06:11 PM

54  The Digital

We are barely scratching the surface in this brief sketch of digitality  in philosophy, but in general it is possible to summarize the trends of 
digital thought via two modes already described in chapter -: di#erential being and dialectical being.

Recall  that  di)erential  being  refers  to  the  ontological  condition  in which being is founded on a basic division of di)erence. Such di)erence 
is often construed in terms of self and other, I and Thou, or being and Being. This basic division of di)erence is not something that achieves any 
kind of lasting synthesis but rather sustains itself in di)erence as such. The shorthand here for di)erential being is the One Two, for it responds 
to  the  rivenness  of  the  one  by  perpetuating  the  rivenness  in  terms  of  a never- ending twoness. Within di)erential being are found !gures like 
Plato, Kant, Heidegger, and many others.Recall  too  that  dialectical  being,  while  also  digital  and  hence  also 
fueled by a sustenance of separations between things, refers to the onto-logical condition in which being is founded on a basic negation, a negation formed from something and  its opposite. Hence dialectical  being means not so much an everlasting twoness but an inexhaustible process 
of  negation  via   reflection  or  opposition.  The  shorthand  for  dialectical being is the Not- One, for it responds to the elemental rivenness of the 
one by reiterating the cleavage into newfound negations, both the ongo-ing negations of the one itself and also of all subsequent products of the 
rivenness of the one. Here reside !gures like Hegel, Marx, or Badiou.The two (-) and the not one (~") are in some senses similar, but ultimately play out in very di)erent ways. Consider both the binarism and the dialectic. According to post- structuralism, the self and other are not, 
strictly speaking, in a dialectical relationship; the other is not simply a negation of the self, and likewise the two terms are never resolved dialectically into some sort of synthesis. The self and other, in their di)erential digitality, are thus properly labeled a binarism.

But something like the boss and the worker can correctly be labeled dialectical, because as they mutually deterritorialize into each other, they 
produce a new synthetic condition of being, whether that is the simple mundane fact of capitalist production (a specific synthesis of worker and 
boss, which could not exist in the absence of either party), or the "grand compromise" of the welfare state, its own kind of synthesis, or that new 
mode of life, the oldest in fact, which takes the name of communism.

    54 26/08/2014   5:06:11 PM

  The Digital  55

These are some of the categorical foundations that structure thinking and being, and indeed di)erentiate thinking from being in the first place. 
As a thought experiment, consider the mental e)ort required to undo the digital core of Western thought: an instance without the transcendental, writing  with  no  original, pure  formlessness  in  matter,  a  media  of incomprehension, or a life made radically inauthentic. Thinking this 
way is di*cult indeed.Laruelle, in a relatively early book, Le principe de minorite' (The Principle  of  Minority),  which  is  chie(y  concerned  with  epistemology  and sketching out the rudimentary terms of Laruelle's non- philosophy, gives 
ebullient voice to such an undertaking:

Can  we  de!ne  the  parts  before  the  Whole  and  independently  of  the 
Whole? di)erences before their repetition and independently of the Idea, 
Logos, Being? minorities before the State and independently of the State? 
being before Being and independently of Being? can we think about events 
before  their  historical  occurrence,  subjects  before  objects  and  deprived  
of objectivity? a time without temporality? singularities or multiplicities 
before all universal and independently of a universal?4

Such  a  strategy  produces  not  so  much  an  "analog  existence"  but  a deprivation of the digital, a deprivation in which the mutually alienated 
couples (part/Whole, di)erences/Idea, minorities/State, being/Being, and so on) are denuded of half their constituency.

This  produces  a  series  of  "weird"  ontological  backwaters,  some  of which have been described, praised even, by the likes of Jacques Rancie`re, 
Jean- Luc Nancy, Giorgio Agamben, Maurice Blanchot, and others: the part  of  no  part,  the  di)erence  that  makes  no  di)erence,  the  minority 
who holds no minority, the being that has left being.The  issue  is  not so  much  an  analog  existence  but  a  kind  of starved 
digitality in which the formerly healthy couplings, each of the compo-nents  mutually  dependent  upon  its  twin,  are  deprived  of  their  other 
halves, producing not a new absence, because that would return us  to  the  digital  condition  of  presence/absence, but  a  positive  replication  of 
the one. The weirdness of the Laruellean undertaking, or those put forth by Rancie`re and others, is a testament to the pervasiveness of the digital 
foundations that structure Western metaphysics.

    55 26/08/2014   5:06:11 PM

56  The Digital

The first de!nition is now on the table, the de!nition of the digital as the one dividing in two. Next comes the question of the analog, and although its de!nition will not be surprising, it is surprising how profoundly rare the analog actually is. In ontology, for example, it is exceptionally 
rare. It will be important, then, to specify very carefully the conditions  of the analogical, when and where it appears in Western thought, and 
perhaps even say a few words about why it remains such an endangered species.

Thesis VII. The analog means the two coming together as one. The ana-log is challenging because it creates relation without distinction. Through 
the  process  that  we  are  calling  di)erentiation-- which  has  nothing  to  do with di)erence-- the analog makes itself evident via two key modes 
(which are ultimately one). These modes are themselves the two poles  of  immanence.  Within  philosophy  there  have  traditionally  been  two 
ways of thinking about immanence, either the immanence of the total plane  of  being,  or  the  immanence  of  the  individual  person  or  object. 
Either immanence in its in!nity, or immanence in its finitude.Recall that, under the first condition, being is understood to be continuous in its immanence. We might therefore label the first analog mode as "the immanence of everything," which is to say an ontological mode of 
pure multiplicity in which radically singular and heterogeneous entities occupy a purely material existence.

There is no essence, no soul, no species to these heterogeneous entities. They are all endogenously caused, assembling and reassembling according  to  forces  of  (ux  and  attraction.  Entities  will  perpetually  "remain within"  themselves,  even  as  they  intensify  and  dissipate  according  to 
their own characteristics and vicissitudes. There are no sets here. There are no complex aggregates. No societies or bodies. There are only multiplicities  or  assemblages.  Here  are  found  the  great  thinkers  of  material immanence like Spinoza or Deleuze.

The shorthand One- as- Multiple is appropriate because such analogic-ity breaks through the rivenness of being by upping the ante to in!nity: 
yes, being is riven, but riven more than once, divided a multiplicity of times, so much in fact that there is a unique mode of immanent being  
for  each  and  every  entity.  Thus  the  oneness  of  the  one  returns  solely  by virtue of the sublime totality of multiplicity. There are so many pure 

    56 26/08/2014   5:06:11 PM

  The Digital  57
multiplicities, and they are so entirely singular, and they are so absolutely immanent to themselves that they are one. Univocity at its purest.

In this way continuous being is a movement of a*rmation, not nega-tion. The continuous being of the One- as- Multiple is strictly a*rmative 
in its movement. And the a*rmative nature of continuous being indi-cates an additive principle: Come one, come all.

Parallel  to  "the  immanence  of  everything"  lies  "the  immanence  of something." The first analog type was labeled continuous being and the 
second  analog  type  generic  being.  Under  this  second  condition,  being  is understood as generic in its immanence. Because the "something" in 
question remains within itself, it has no cause to go outside of itself; it refrains from forming relations. If continuous being is essentially schizophrenic, a fragmentation producing a multiplicity of the self, generic being is essentially autistic, a withdrawal characterized by a diminishment, or 
simply a rewiring, of communication and relation. Generic being refrains from  forming  relations  both  with  itself  (the  transcendental)  and  with 
outside objects or the outside world ("prehensions" in Whitehead's lexi-con). It is therefore quite literally "something," no more and no less, because there is nothing specific that can be attributed to it. Today the most sophisticated theory of generic being is Laruelle's, even if he ultimately 
stands apart from the current four- part model. But generic being is also found in Agamben, Badiou, Deleuze, Hardt and Negri, and many other 
thinkers.When an individual "remains within" itself it ceases to participate in 
the system of predication in which subjects are associated with specific predicate attributes: a is b, in which the subject a is endowed with the 
attribute b. In its immanence, this "something" has no concourse with any attributes-- indeed this is precisely the reason why it may be called 
"something." (What  folly  in  that  old  philosophical  query,  why  is  there something rather than nothing? A more useful question would be to ask 
why is there everything rather than something!)The shorthand for the second kind of analog being is the One- and- 

the- Same. The key issue has to do with the subtractive or negative course of generic being, which is to say the way in which the generic subtracts 
from  being  in  order  to  achieve  its  generic  status.  Unlike  the  additive quality of continuous being, generic being subtracts its own attributes, 
negating and removing them.

    57 26/08/2014   5:06:11 PM

58  The Digital

Generic  being  is  what  Deleuze  had  in  mind  when  discussing  vir-tualization. Virtualization is a deterritorialization or derivation in which 
actual entities are deindividuated into indistinction with themselves and with other things. Of course, virtualization has nothing to do with "virtual reality" or with computers per se. It is called virtual not because it  is  cybernetic  or  phantasmagorical  but  because  of  the  way  in  which  it 
thrusts the actuality of specific situations into a newfound (ux of indis-tinction. The specific becomes the generic. The two becomes one. The 
individual becomes impersonal, an imperson.In this sense the analog is not exactly a question of analogical relation. 
True, the analog creates an analogy between two things (the analogy of oneness). But it would be a mistake to think that the analog is about a 
relationship between two things. The analog is ultimately not a question of  mimesis  or   reflection  or  representation  or  any  such  concepts.  The 
analog means that the two becomes one. Hence both continuous being and generic being are instances of the analog; they address the fundamental rivenness of being (Thesis II) by attempting to revert being back to the one.

The identity equation: a = a. These are the two basic ways in which the analogical exhibits itself in philosophy, as either the continuous being of 
the One- as- Multiple or the generic being of the One- and- the- Same. In both instances the two comes together as one. For the former, the ana- 
log indicates a twoness (threeness, fourness, multiplicity) of entities as it returns to a baseline continuous oneness of univocal being in its totality. 
For the latter, the analog indicates a breakdown of the two sides of the attribution formula (a is b, this is that) into the generic oneness of undistinguished being.For the analog, it is not so much a question of reformulating the equation and radically broadening it as a is x, which would read as "a is any-thing whatsoever." If the equation is to remain, it will have to take the 
form of the most useless equation of all, the tautology or identity equa-tion: a is a, which would read as "a is itself, whatever that is."

Herein lies a clue to help unravel Laruelle's strange thought. His goal is to articulate a pure analytical immanence of the a priori, and to do it 
in a way that is not overly simple or ultimately pointless (as Kant would have quali!ed such an endeavor; indeed Laruelle is closer to Fichte than 

    58 26/08/2014   5:06:12 PM

  The Digital  59
Kant in this regard, particularly Fichte's interest in the purely ideal a pri-ori realm).

5

Laruelle will often dwell on analogical identities such as a = a or the immanent  identity  of  the  One- in- One,  attributing  to  them  profound, 

lasting, and indeed practical utility. For other thinkers, such expressions are often classi!ed as unhelpful tautology, or at best classi!ed as part of 
the fundamental laws of analysis (for example, the law of identity or the law  of  noncontradiction).  Yet,  surprisingly,  expressions  like  a  =  a  are 
very powerful for Laruelle, because they ratify the law of identity neces-sary for the ultimate step into radical immanence (One- in- One).

This reveals one of the greatest contributions that Laruelle brings to contemporary  thinking,  to  demonstrate  that  the  tautology  or  identity 
equation, a is a, is not at the fringes of thought, as either a logical dead end or, as Aristotle teaches us, a starting axiom bootstrapping all subsequent rationality. In fact, Laruelle considers it to be the very core of the most central concept in all of thinking, the one as pure identity. In other 
words,  the  tautology  gains  a  newfound  respectability  under  Laruelle.6 For other thinkers, a priori truths such as a is a occupy an important but 
relatively small niche within real- world rationality. Laruelle by contrast slides open the window of the a priori to include all of reality. In other 
words the Laruellean real is an a priori real-- a stunning notion to say the least.  It  quali!es  Laruelle  for  the  designation  "radical  anti- empiricist" 
and highlights one of the many di)erences between Deleuze and Laruelle.
Are analog events possible? A !nal matter to address before continuing is the question of the event. The next chapter is devoted entirely to events, 
but a few preliminary things ought to be stated now. To the extent that an event brings into the world a change from x to y, a basic fact holds sway: 
events are digital. This stems directly from how we have been de!ning the digital throughout. But how to treat the analog on this question?

Because the analog refrains from forming hard and fast distinctions between  states,  can  there  ever  be  something  like  an  analog  event?  It 
would be tempting to say yes, by explaining that events under the analog regime are simply smooth transitions between states. Simply replace the 
sawtooth wave of the digital with the curvilinear wave of the analog. But the  more  rigorous  position  is  the  correct  one:  for,  properly  speaking, 
there is no such thing as an analog event.

    59 26/08/2014   5:06:12 PM

6;  The Digital

As  discussed  in  chapter  ",  the  prevent  means  that  which  prevents  the arrival of events and is therefore essentially prophylactic. But it also 
means that which comes before the event-- which is to say structurally and synchronically prior. Within the realm of being it is admittedly dif!cult to see real proof of this "synchronic before." But consider the ana-log's relationship to the one: the analog is a kind of quasi- one, a fallen 
one, a profaned one. (So too is the digital.) The prevent, in this sense, superimposes a logic onto the evental architecture itself, pointing backward toward a moment in the evental architecture prior to the founding of events. Such a moment, of course, is nothing other than the one itself. 
Thus in adopting the prevent, the analog is in e)ect o)ering a proxy into the "original condition" of the one, which is to say prior to the moment 
in which the one divided into two, creating the metaphysical universe (the standard model) in which we reside today. In this way, the digital 
coincides with the event, while the analog coincides with the prevent.Does  this  create  a  problem?  The  continuous  being  of  Deleuze,  for 
example, is saturated with events. To acknowledge that there are no ana-log events, only analog prevents, is merely to acknowledge that the evental site is always also a transcendental site. Because the analog only exists within the terrain of immanence, there is no such thing as an analog transcendental. Thus, by extension, there can be no such thing as an analog event in the proper sense. Given this, one must either compromise on 
the commitment to immanence and confess to a "transcendental empir-icism," as Deleuze does, or one must modify the de!nition of event to 
allow for the prevent.
Analogy is a parallelism. This is the condition of immanence. The two core terms, digital and analog, are now on the table, each with some semblance of a de!nition. However the question of twoness and the relation-ship between things under the various modes of the standard model is 
still potentially confusing. In fact it seems that relation itself has been left out of the picture, because the analogical dissolves relation in favor of 
fusion, while the digital splinters being into so many standardized atoms that any relation formed between them would claim no real binding signi!cance. We can address this potential point of confusion by consider-ing two terms, parallelism and parallelity. Analogs stem from parallelisms; 
digitals from parallelities.

    60 26/08/2014   5:06:12 PM

  The Digital  6:

The  analogical  dissolves  relation  in  favor  of  fused  immanence,  but does this mean that relation is lost tout court? In the strict sense relation 
is indeed lost, relation as a connection between two discrete entities or states.  Therefore  immanence,  in  which  matter  "remains  within"  itself 
and has no cause to go outside itself, prohibits relation. Yet at the same time, by remaining within, immanence demonstrates a more simple and 
elemental relation. This is the relation of the same. By remaining within itself, immanent matter demonstrates a relation with itself. This "auto- 
relation" is, of course, only a pseudo- relation. If it were a real relation it would revert back to the transcendental: an entity's essential relationship 
with  itself  as  it  persists  through  the  permutations  of  time  and  space. Immanence, by contrast, has nothing to do with an entity's essential relationship with itself, because immanence has nothing to do with essence and  all  the  metaphysical  freight  that  goes  along  with  it.  This  pseudo- 
relation or auto- relation is what we will call a "parallelism."A parallelism is a condition of twoness in which the two is ultimately 
overcome by the one. The two of the parallelism is really only a quasi- two. So obsessed with itself, so locked together, so bound by the parallel 
nature  of  its  own  coupling,  the  parallelism  is  monomaniacal  about  its own moment of being.

The spiral grooves on a vinyl record are the perfect parallelism: never will they diverge or converge, the two sides of the groove lock arms in 
continuous variation, jostling the needle back and forth at the frequen-cies required for audible sound. All because the two sides of the groove, 
while two, are not distinct. They are merely parallel. As Laruelle might put it, the two side of the groove are "clones" of each other. As clones they 
constitute a duality, a twoness, yet they are nevertheless bound together by a relationship of identity, a sameness.

Immanence  therefore,  de!ned  as  "a  remains  within  a,"  is  nothing  but  an  adolescent  form  of  pure  immanence.  Pure  immanence  would 
eschew the language of equation altogether, simply uttering "a" alone, an utterance  that  is  both  senseless  and  truthless  but  nevertheless  purely 
immanent.
If analogy stems from an immanent parallelism, digitality by contrast produces a transcendental parallelity. Parallelism holds fast to the form 
of  the  parallel.  But  parallelity  holds  fast  to  the  logic  of  the  parallel. 

    61 26/08/2014   5:06:12 PM

6!  The Digital
Whereas parallelism is ultimately a duality of the one, parallelity is an endless reduplication of the parallel. This results in what might be called 
the "massively multiple" nature of parallelity-- for which massively mul-tiplayer online  games are but one real- world exemplar. The  twins of a 
parallelism are simply the twin edges of a single line. But the twinning  of parallelity never stops, resulting in parallels upon parallels propagating laterally. Parallelism is always one- dimensional, while parallelity is always two-  or multidimensional. Indeed parallelity is often highly nonlinear.  So  if  parallelism  is  a  condition  of  twoness  in  which  the  two  is ultimately overcome by the one, parallelity is a condition of twoness in 
which the two is swiftly and ultimately overcome by the multiple.What is perhaps most di*cult to grasp about the analog is the complete absence of any real sort of di)erence. A standard dictionary de!ni-tion of the analog might be something like "the continuous comparison 
or  proportion  between  two  things."  But  within  such  proportion  there  is only commonality, not di)erence. An analogy creates an identity. And 
identity means "same" (again from the Latin meaning "the very same"). So,  while  seemingly  counterintuitive,  the  parallelism  of  the  analogical 
requires a heterogeneous substrate. Indeed this hetero is no enemy to the identity of analogy. The opposite is true: only a baseline heterogeneity,  
as in the pure multiplicities and generic persons of Deleuze's and Badiou's cosmology, can possibly produce the conditions for a relation of the common.  Hence  when  two  heterogeneous  elements  come  together  in  the parallelism of analogy, as with the wasp and the orchid, a true identity is 
forged at the threshold of their coupling.Such true identity forever eludes the digital. Digital relations are always 
already fake or simulated, for they arise from radical standardization at the atomic level. Of course, the digital produces relation; it is part of the 
very de!nition of the term. And in its relationality the digital ultimately o)ers something much more seductive, for the digital produces the transcendental. But what does this mean? The digital says that the one divides into two. So, within the modal condition of the two (or the three, or the 
four, or the  multiple),  a  universe  populated  by  a purely  homogeneous substrate of standardized atoms, there must be some way in which these 
atomic entities-- so absolutely separate, so absolutely standard-- can over-come  their sti(ing  congruity  and  relate  to  each  other.  In  other  words,  

    62 26/08/2014   5:06:12 PM

  The Digital  63
the entire substrate becomes the fodder for the emergence of a general equivalent, whether zeros and ones, the citizens of a liberal democracy, 
or something else entirely.Kant describes the transcendental via the things required for experience, which is to say the things required for something to relate to a world. Likewise, Hegel speaks of the transcendental in terms of manifestation, 
actualization,  or  realization,  these  being  the  processes  through  which something persists throughout the expression of what it is. For Heidegger 
the transcendental is seen through the basic reality of being, which re-veals itself. For Henry it is not revealing but revelation. For Malabou it is 
plasticity. Even Deleuze, albeit not a philosopher of the transcendental, makes room for a proxy concept, expression, that stands in for the transcendental. And in Laruelle, who like Deleuze is, shall we say, aggressive in his pursuit of immanence, the transcendental has a role to play: the 
clone is transcendental, because it exists apart or alongside the one, even as it remains in strict identity with it.

In short, to adopt the digital is to adopt the transcendental. It is prac-tically a contradiction in terms to speak of the "immanence of the digital." This is why there is so much discourse around "emergence" or the "ghost in the machine" regarding computers. The digital requires some 
form of the transcendental, and today, particularly today, it is di*cult to speak in terms of the transcendental without resorting to such !gurative 
language.Relation  under analogy  is  a  chained  relation,  a  monomaniacal  relation. But digital relation is a truly liberated relation, for just like existen-tialist philosophers who speak with both apprehension and excitement 
of  the  liberation  of  existence,  the  digital  relation  arises  from  out  of  a pure, profane nihilism. The digital conjures a relation-- a true miracle-- 
between  aggregates  of  things  that  really  should  have  nothing  at  all  to  say to one another. The digital must transcend the conditions of its own 
being. It must transcend the fact of its own self- alienation. It is therefore the most emblematic form of the transcendental.

The ultimate digitality is a digitality of space. Space is one of Kant's tran-scendental categories, for along with other things like time it provides the 
very conditions of possibility for experience itself. But there is a common 

    63 26/08/2014   5:06:12 PM

64  The Digital
assumption that time and space are relatively interchangeable in terms of their transcendental quality. Time is merely the "fourth dimension," it is 
often claimed, the first three dimensions being dimensions of space.In his Cinema $: The Movement- Image, already on the first page and 
wasting no time, Deleuze describes a digital space and a digital time. Dig-ital space is "a single, identical, homogenous space"; digital time is "a time 
which is impersonal, uniform, abstract, invisible, or imperceptible."7 The former is composed of any- point- whatevers, and the latter of any- instant- 
whatevers. The former a whateverness of space, the latter a whateverness of time.

8

Working in the shadow of Bergson, Deleuze could imagine a homog-enous temporality, and he could image a homogenous media substrate 

that supported such a temporality. He could imagine a cinematic tempo-rality  of regular intervals (x frames  per second),  and  a linear series of 
photographic frames (the !lm strip).But what of homogenous space-- could Deleuze fully imagine such a 
scenario? He could in other books, as with the smooth spaces that popu-late A Thousand Plateaus. And he could in the Cinema books too, at least 
partially, with his any- point- whatevers and any- space- whatevers. He even describes an electronic image regime that would subsume the cinema.

9 

Nevertheless in the Cinema books the concepts remain incomplete, and at times even invite misunderstanding. For of course Deleuze's concern 

was chie(y cinematic in those books, not computational as it would be later, or rhizomatic as it was before.

An additional extrapolation is necessary to !ll out Deleuze's aesthetic theory: not simply a medium rooted in a digitality of time (cinema) but 
a medium rooted in a digitality of space (computer); not simply a what-everness of time but a whateverness of space.

Cinema takes time as an independent variable, rendering time regular and consistent, pushing time back and sacri!cing it to industrial automation. Thus Deleuze's two cinematic modes, the movement- image and the time- image, are both ultimately "time" images by virtue of being irretrievably  cinematographic.  The  movement- image  is  not  ultimately  a spatialized image, even if it gains its momentum from the strip of photographic images arranged in a row "through" space. The spatiality of the !lm strip is a highly bounded spatiality, an arti!cial spatiality, but never, 
as Bergson might say, a pure or concrete space. So the movement- image 

    64 26/08/2014   5:06:12 PM

  The Digital  65
still never captures something like a "space- image."10 A full digitality of space eluded Deleuze at the time. In fact it would have required writing 

a third volume to explore it fully. It would have required a Cinema %.And yet at the same time the time- image, even as it approaches space, 
even as it summons space to smolder and emanate volumetrically, also fails to capture the whatevernesses of the space- image, even as it shows 
them. The !nal shots of Antonioni's Eclipse might show a time- image, and within the time- image a smoldering, pure absence of enduring space. 
But this is not the kind of space we mean. Like Bergson's "false movement" of cinema, this is a "false" space for it rides not atop an undercarriage of 
spatial digitality (only a temporal digitality of any- instant- whatevers). If cinema, for Deleuze, moves by virtue of a relationship between the micro 
and macro levels, that is to say "that which happens between objects or parts" and "that which expresses the duration or the whole," can we also 
extrapolate  to  space  and  claim  a  relationship  between  the  micro  and macro levels of space?

What if space, not time, were forced into the role of the independent variable? What if space were removed  from the equation, mechanized 
and dissolved? What if there were a virtuality of space rather than a vir-tuality of time? Deleuze opens the door to such a universe in Cinema $ 
via  the  concepts  of  the  "any- point- whatever"  and  the  "any- space- whatever." But the door remains open; he does not walk through, at least 
not entirely.In fact he structured his vocabulary incorrectly. The chief di*culty is 
that the any- space- whatever and the any- instant- whatever are not struc-turally comparable in Deleuze. They are not homologues of one another. 

Consider the micro- macro relation. It is not correct to say that the any- space- whatevers are the digital micro atoms of pure space, just as Deleuze 
de!nes  the  any- instant- whatevers  as  the  digital  micro  atoms  of  pure duration. A piece of vocabulary is missing. The any- space- whatever resides at cinematic layers - or ., the layers of movement and duration, not at layer ", the layer of sets of discernible parts, where one would expect it 
to reside.11 So Deleuze's any- space- whatever is not wrong per se (because it describes a real cinematographic experience), but the choice of words 

is confusing, because it requires a jump between incongruent levels.Deleuze's  system  ought  to  be  redrafted  slightly,  extrapolating  three 
spatial levels from the three temporal levels he already provides:

    65 26/08/2014   5:06:12 PM

66  The Digital
From Deleuze's three temporal levels . . .   . . . extrapolate three spatial levels
sets of discernible parts (frames), or   sets of discernible points, or      any- instant- whatevers      any- point- whatevers

the real movement of translation between   the real relation of form between     frames, or the movement- image      points, or the model- image 
the duration or the whole;   the extension or the whole; the     the time- image      space- image

Deleuze understood all this implicitly, and speaks to the question in-directly, even if he doesn't spell out every detail. The idea is there, a multiplicity of vision. Deleuze's discussion of the !lms of Joris Ivens proves it. The bridge in Ivens's "#-% short !lm "is a potentiality. The rapid montage 
of seven hundred shots means that di)erent views can be !tted together in an in!nite number of ways."

12

Seven hundred shots is indeed impressive. But instead imagine seven hundred frames rather than shots, or better yet seven thousand, all captured simultaneously, each from its own vantage point. This kind of syn-chronic mediation would begin to capture a bona !de any- space- whatever, 

a real kind of "space- image." Deleuze's version of things is the best that the cinema can summon; only with the more fully present digitality of 
the computer are we able to evoke a true whateverness of space.So beyond Deleuze's digitality of time lies a more emblematic mode of 
digitality, the digitality of space. Of course time allows for co- temporal events, and it is common for two things to take place at the same moment 
in time. But there can be no co- spatial objects, even as we may speak of a body passing through a cloud, or an alloy of two substances. None of these 
are instances of two discrete entities occupying the same space, for the cloud envelops the body and hence passes around it, while the alloy is in 
fact a compound and hence no longer two separate bodies in any real sense.Because of this prohibition on co- location, space is the natural domain 
of digitality. Space is the place of splitting, di)erentiating, and holding at arm's length. When the one divides into two, it always does so in terms of 
space. Even when it does not, it still does, through the proxy of metaphor. Hence when one speaks of a split in time, or even better when the phenomenologists pro)er their transcendental in terms of time, one speaks in metaphorical terms, deploying what is fundamentally a spatial category 

    66 26/08/2014   5:06:12 PM

  The Digital  67
of  thought.  Whether  consciously  or  not,  time  is  spatialized.  Knowing this, the phenomenologists tend to describe the temporal transcendental 
as a "project," as something that "projects."Digitalities of time, if they ever properly exist, will ultimately reduce 
to two limit conditions, both essentially theological: either the big bang of creation or the collapse of the end of days; birth or death. Time might 
have begun and it might be ending. These are the two limit conditions. Even  when  non- theologians  address  these  questions  they  often  lapse 
into  the  language  of  religion,  whether  "the  end  of  history"  or  "being- unto- death." (By contrast, history, which is to say actually existing temporal events, is indeed a properly digital domain. History, not time, is the realm of breaks and continuities, of revolutions and restorations.)

In Cinema 5: The Time- Image, a book that describes the breakdown  of cinematic representation after World War II, Deleuze introduces the 
term "peaks of present" as one of a handful of ways in which postwar cinema was able to su)er the collapse of the earlier visual schema and 
invent a new mode of vision from the ashes of the old. He does not spend much time with the term and cannot seem to dig up too many cinematic 
examples to  (esh it out,  reverting  to  the  work  of Alain  Robbe- Grillet, imported  from literature,  and  his  collaboration  with  Alain  Resnais  on 
the "#$" !lm Last Year at Marienbad. Yet in Robbe- Grillet, Deleuze sees a very specific treatment of time, a kind of pan- temporality, in which all 
points of time are treated in terms of their own present and their own superimposition into a simultaneity of presents. As with the pandemonium of "all spirits," Robbe- Grillet produces a pan- chronology of all times merged together, "a present of the future, a present of the present and  

a present of the past."13 For Deleuze this produces a kind of vertigo, an indiscernibility that "make[s] time frightening and inexplicable."

14

Now compare this pan- present to Laruelle's image of the rocket from his enigmatic essay "On the Black Universe." Laruelle describes a rocket 

that refuses to blast o) or to land, but somehow (ickers directly into the blackness of deep space: "The rocket passes through in!nite distances. . . . 
Let [it] jump over the cosmic barrier and enter into the hyperspace of the Universe. . . .  Let  your  rockets  become  subject  of  the  Universe  and  be 
present at every point of the Remote."15 Does Laruelle's "present at every point  of  the  Remote"  have  anything  to  do  with  Deleuze's  "present  at 
every point of time"? On the one hand, they are both dealing with the 

    67 26/08/2014   5:06:12 PM

68  The Digital
virtual,  to  borrow  a  term  from  Deleuze  that  Laruelle  does  not  often  use.  But  on  the  other  hand,  Deleuze's  pandemonium  is  a  virtuality  of 

time, while Laruelle's pandemonium is a virtuality of space. Or at least  it appears to be space; we might expand the claim and make it slightly 
more pointed: a virtuality of fact.Deleuze  says the  virtual  is  real. Laruelle  never  quite  says  the  real  is 
virtual. His preferred description is to say the real is in "superposition." But nevertheless the real, while remaining immanent to itself, is present 
at every point, and thus in some basic sense, "virtual" to every point. Fur-ther, Laruelle's real is never in a relationship with its virtualities, and thus 
Laruelle will never speak in the language of forces and counterforces so common  in  Deleuze  (action- reaction,  actual- virtual,  territorialization- 
deterritorialization).Our rockets may be present at every point of the Remote, but in strict 
Laruellean terms the story is slightly o). For the Remote, as Real, is pres-ent unilaterally and ultimately at every point of the rocket.

Today there are two kinds of spatial digitality that hold sway: (at digi-tality  and  deep  digitality.  Flat  digitality  results  from  the  reduplicative 
multiplexing of the object. Consider today's media systems. Consider the many kinds of grid screens that populate our world: the security guard's 
multichannel montage of closed- circuit security camera feeds; the cel-lular grids of video compression codecs or more prosaically the bitmap 
image  itself; the computer desktop with its multiple parallel  and over-lapping windows; the computer game with its spatially segmented heads up display; the television sportscast with stat bu)ers, text crawls, inset videos, and split screens.

All these are no longer images per se, they are aggregations of cells that combine and coordinate to create some kind of whole (see RSG, RSGFORK=6.$,  the  frontispiece of this  chapter). The  political- archi tectural touchstone for (at digitality is thus the panopticon prison: Each inmate's 
cell  a  pixel  on  a  JumboTron  image,  all  under  the  watchful  eye  of  the guard  (who  is,  ideally,  a  single  person  occupying  a  single  Euclidean 
point). The photographic touchstone is the telephoto view: the (at scope of  view,  with  peripheral  vision  boxed  out  and  all  relations  reduced  to 
planar relations one behind another.Deep digitality results from the reduplicative multiplexing of the subject. Instead  of a single point of view scanning a multiplicity of image 

    68 26/08/2014   5:06:12 PM

  The Digital  69
feeds,  deep  digitality  is  a  question  of  a  multiplicity,  nay  an  in!nity,  of points of view (anking and (ooding the world viewed. These are not so 
much  matrices  of  screens  but  matrices  of  vision.  They  are  the  CCTV meshes deployed across cities; the multiple data points involved in data 
mining; the virtual camera or "(y- through mode" in CAD software; or crowd- sourcing swarms that converge on a target.

Again it is the image that has su)ered. These are all no longer images in any traditional sense. Not the collage of (at digitality, deep digitality is 
para- photographic, more sculpture or theater than anything else. Or like music, perhaps, with its penchant for multiple voices. The prison is now 
reversed, a reverse panopticon in which a multiplicity of watchers all col-laborate to convene upon a singular point.

16 On this score, anyone who 

says the contemporary world is a vast panopticon has the facts of the mat-ter exactly backward. The cybernetic world may be a control society, but 

it is a reverse panopticon, not a panopticon as classically conceived. The condition of cellularity is now subjective not objective. In other words, 
within deep digitality the subject is cellular (the watcher), whereas within (at  digitality  the  object  is  cellular  (the  watched).  The  object  is  now  a 
Euclidean point, while the "subjective" points of view have metastasized into multiplicity. What this produces is a curvature of space. Space bends 
and recedes. Space grows deep as the subject metastasizes and engulfs it.So if the previous mode was the apotheosis of the telephoto (a telephoto ontology), this is the apotheosis of the wide angle (a wide- angle ontology). In splitting from one to two, deep digitality reintegrates the 
world into a rendered universe, viewable from all sides, modeled from all angles, predictable under all variable conditions.

The analog and the digital. To summarize what has been stated so far, the  analog,  understood  as  the  two  merging  into  one,  is  the  universe  
of  proportion,  of  continuous  variability.  Modular  couplings  of  things come together in chained relations that are themselves linear. Because of 
this the analog relation, while only apparently based on a fundamental two ness, is ultimately a mode of immanence, for the apparent twoness  
is dissolved or deterritorialized into a continuous and generic identity. The underlying substrate for the analog is thus heterogeneity, which we 
understand not simply as collections of di)erent things but as pure dif-ference,  a  di)erence  so  pure  that  it  is,  to  use  a  word  from  Deleuze, 
"smooth." Because of its questionable applicability to relation, the analog 

    69 26/08/2014   5:06:12 PM

7;  The Digital
has no proper concourse with the event. Instead we considered the con-cept of the prevent, which refers to both the preemption of the event and 
the prior of the event. But the prevent does not mean that "nothing hap-pens," that there is no change, no events as such. It means simply that the 
valence of "what happens" must be radically recon!gured, not around causality, but around something like determination or destiny.

17

The  digital,  by  contrast,  is  de!ned  as  the  one  dividing  in  two.  It  is  the universe of separation, alienation, distinction, division, and making- 

discrete. Multiplicities of standardized atoms proliferate in massively par-allel relations. Such relations are typically nonlinear in nature. Emerging 
out of a  homogeneous  substrate, these  multiples (merely reduplicative copies of the twos) are themselves transcendental because they accomplish  a  persistent  expression  of  being  across  the  extension  of  space, through  time,  and  in  relation  both  to  themselves  and  to  other  things. 
This is why the most basic forms of digitality are di)erential being and dialectical being. The former exhibits the transcendental simply as mediation  through  the  di)erent  layers  of  the  metaphysical  cosmos,  while  the latter through the persistence and transformation of entities as they 
weather the mutations of contradiction.The analog is an enemy to the transcendental and hence must only  
be a virtualization. Yet by contrast the digital is an actualization because it  continually  "solves"  the  virtual,  territorializing  it  back  into  discrete 
things. (Do not believe the dot- com ideology: the digital has nothing to do with the virtual.) And just as the analog is the realm of the prevent, 
the  digital  is  the  only proper  realm  of  the  event because  it  is  the only realm in which truly decisive or trenchant relation exists, which is to say 
a "liberated" relation of in!nite possibility.
Analog  Digital
Continuous comparison  Discrete sampling
Twoness overcome by the one  Twoness overcome by the multiple
An identity  A di)erence
Heterogeneous substrate  Homogeneous substrate
Immanent  Transcendental
Parallelism  Parallelity
A duality of the one  Massively multiple

    70 26/08/2014   5:06:12 PM

  The Digital  7:

Because  this  system  is  at  least  somewhat  re(exive,  it  is  possible  to interrogate the analog/digital distinction itself. Of course, in being a distinction,  it  is  a  form  of  digitality-- as  is  the  discourse  in  much  of  this book. So the digital triumphs over the analog, at least under the specific 
conditions of the standard model in which we now reside. The deeper rami!cations of such a claim, if it is true, are explored further in Part II 
of the book, particularly chapter ",.

    71 26/08/2014   5:06:12 PM

f o u r
Events

What is an event? The question is typically answered in one of two ways: events are relations, or events are decisions. Depending on context, events 
often appear as either relations or decisions. In one sense, an event is a relation between two moments in time, or between two states of a)airs. 
Likewise a relation is only a relation by virtue of being able to be actual-ized into an event.

Yet  in  another  sense, an  event  is a  decision.  As  a more or less  con-scious action, it must be willed into existence by someone or some kind 
of  catalyzing  agent.  Following  this  line,  an  event  is  simply  the  mirror image of a desire, aspiration, a)ordance, or drive: overladen snow desires 
the avalanche; an enzyme aspires to catalyze a chemical reaction; a per-son decides to jump.

Relation means to bring back. Decision means to cut o). So the ques-tion may be rephrased: Is an event a bringing back, or is an event a cutting o)? In other words, does the event bring something back into being or cut something o) from it?

For his part, Deleuze is satis!ed with the event never deviating from the material world (after all, he is opposed to classical metaphysics), while 
Badiou's event breaks from being. In Deleuze the event consists of inten-sive or extensive transformations within the furious plane of immanence 
(see Furienmeister, The Furie, the frontispiece of this chapter). But for Badiou the  givenness  of  being  is fundamentally profane  and  therefore 
must be superseded by a voluntaristic deviation. Badiou's voluntaristic event is an instance of the generic. But, as I suggest here, even if Badiou's 

73

    73 26/08/2014   5:06:13 PM

74  Events
instincts  lead  him  in  interesting  directions  he  does  not  go  quite  far enough in his quest for the genericity of the event. For it is only Laruelle 
who refuses to think the event as either relation or decision.To say that events are relations is to say that events remain within the 

core substrate of being. Here an event is not a deus ex machina descend-ing into the scene from somewhere beyond, modifying or rescuing the 
world. All changes to the world are immanent to the world. An event is not di)erent from a relation; on the contrary, an event is simply a new 
relation. Actuate an event to make visible a new relation; identify a rela-tion and one will have identi!ed the aftermath of an event. Again, this  
is  the  kind  of  universe  described  by  Deleuze. Events  are  immanent to material  processes.  In  fact,  events  are  these  processes  themselves  and 
therefore  cannot  be  distinguished  from  them.  Events  as  relations  are workaday events. They are not particularly special and there is no miracle in their being occasioned. The election of the first black president of the United States is an event, but so is cellular mitosis, and so is choosing 
to have co)ee instead of tea at the breakfast table.To say that the event is a decision is to say that an event is wholly different  from  the  basic  ontological  categories  of  object  and  relation.  An event is not merely a relation. It leaves the world behind and, from an 
alternate vantage point, actuates a transformation in the state of the situ-ation. It is the principle through which a specific kind of world changes 
into a di)erent kind of world. Such is the universe described by Badiou, in stark contrast with Deleuze. For Badiou, events are external to worlds. 
As such, events are always special, like miniature miracles.Choosing co)ee or tea never rises to the level of the event, for such a 
pseudo- choice does not e)ect a change in the state of the situation. Event as decision means that the event itself must be so a)ecting, so seductive, 
so total, so cataclysmic that it tears apart the fabric of the world, so that new objects and new relations, and indeed new aftershock events, will 
come into existence.So, on the one hand, the event as relation describes a vitalist, process- 
oriented,  or  superlative  materialism.  The  world  consists  of  countless, endless  events  wrought  by  the  inexhaustible wellsprings  of  life  known  
as the desiring machines. But, on the other hand, the event as decision describes a voluntarism, a labor willed into existence by the militant subjects of the holy warriors, the activists, the campaigners, the evangelists, 

    74 26/08/2014   5:06:13 PM

  Events  75
the committed. (One need not be anthropocentric on this point; (owers and fawns can and will be their own kind of holy warriors, can and will 
exude a desire, just as much as humans do.)Is the fabric of the world good in itself? Or does something stink here? 
Is the good a deviation from this life or merely a recon!guration of it? Deleuze,  while  hardly  ever  tra*cking  in  moral  platitudes,  must  still 
claim  that  the  fabric  of  the  world  is  good  in  itself,  because  he  locates events in the world. Badiou, by contrast, must claim that the fabric of the 
world, which he calls the "state of the situation," is wanting, since Badiou's events are deviations from the world.

Indeed these philosophical modes carry their own theological tenden-cies, many of them Christian or pseudo- Christian. Heidegger's Ereignis 
is  a  thinly  veiled  creationism,  is  it  not?  And  Badiou's  event  is  a  kind  of miracle, the rapture that grants a departure from this profane world. 
Deleuze, for his part, illustrates a form of non- Christian, heretical cre-ationism, in which the new issues forth from pure immanence (not from 
the  word  or  the  spirit).  And  for  his  part  Laruelle's  return  to  the  One smacks of a mystical neoplatonism.

First path: analog events. The previous chapter asserted that, properly speaking, there is no such thing as an analog event. But that was something of a white lie, a temporary placeholder until the question could be addressed in greater detail. In order to make any sense of the event, it  
is first necessary to step back for a moment and mediate further on the concept of givenness, particularly as it was formulated in Theses I and II, 
that the real is given over to a mediation divided from it.The "things that are given" can be truncated to the "givens," or more 
technically the data. Data are the very facts of the givenness of Being. They  are  knowable  and  measurable.  Data  display  a  facticity;  they  are 
"what  already  exists,"  and  as  such  are  a  determining  apparatus.  They indicate what is present, what exists. The word data carries certain scientific or empirical undertones. But more important are the phenomeno-logical overtones: data refer to the neutered, generic fact of "the things 
having been given."Even in this simple arrangement a rudimentary relation holds sway. 
For  implicit  in  the  notion  of  the  facticity  of  givenness  is  a  relation  to givenness. Data are not just a question of the givenness of Being, but are 

    75 26/08/2014   5:06:13 PM

76  Events
also necessarily illustrative of a relationship back toward a Being that has been given. In short, givenness itself implies a relation. This is one of the 
fundamental observations of phenomenology.Even if nothing specific can be said about a given entity x, it is possible 
to say that, if given, x is something as opposed to nothing, and therefore that x has a relationship to its own givenness as something. X is "as x"; 
the as- structure is all that is required to demonstrate that x exists in a relation. (By contrast, if x were immanent to itself, it would not be possible to assume relation. But by virtue of being made distinct as some-thing given, givenness implies non- immanence and thus relation.) Such 
a "something" can be understood in terms of self- similar identity or, as the scientists say, negentropy, a striving to remain the same.

So  even  as  data  are  de!ned  in  terms  of  their  givenness,  their  non- immanence with the one, they also display a relation with themselves. 
Through their own self- similarity or relation with themselves, they tend back toward the one (as the most generic instance of the same). The logic 
of data is therefore a logic of existence and identity: on the one hand, the facticity of data means that they exist, that they ex- sistere, meaning to 
stand out of or from; on the other hand, the givenness of data as some-thing means that they assume a relationship of identity, as the self- similar 
"whatever entity" that was given.The true de!nition of data, therefore, is not simply "the things hav- 
ing been given." The de!nition must conjoin givenness and relation. For this reason, data often go by another name, a name that more suitably 
describes the implicit imbrication of givenness and relation. The name is information.

Information combines both aspects of data: the root form refers to a relationship (here a relationship of identity as same), while the pre!x in 
refers  to  the  entering  into  existence  of  form,  the  actual  givenness  of abstract form into real concrete formation.

Heidegger sums it up well with the following observation about the idea: "All metaphysics including its opponent positivism speaks the language of Plato. The basic word of its thinking, that is, of his presentation of the Being of beings, is eidos, idea: the outward appearance in which 
beings as such show themselves. Outward appearance, however, is a man-ner of presence."

1 In other words, outward appearance or idea is not a 

deviation from presence, or some precondition that produces presence, 

    76 26/08/2014   5:06:13 PM

  Events  77
it is precisely coterminous with presence. To understand data as infor-mation means to understand data as idea, but not just idea, also a host of 
related terms: form, class, concept, thought, image, outward appear ance, shape, presence, or form- of- appearance. An entity "in- form" is not a substantive entity, nor is it an objective one. The in- form is the negen tropic transcendental of the situation, be it "material" like the givens or "ideal" 
like  the  encoded  event.  Hence  an  idea  is  just  as  much  subject  to  in- formation  as  are  material  objects.  An  oak  tree  is  in- formation,  just  as 
much as a computer !le is in- formation.All  of  this  is  simply  another  way  to  understand  Parmenides's  claim 
about the primary identity of philosophy: "Thought and being are the same"; or as rendered by Heidegger: "For the same perceiving (thinking) 
as well as being."2 Thus, as a way to deepen the original description of the standard model, we may now reiterate the gist of Theses I and II using 
new vocabulary: Being is the same as being in- formation. The standard world  is  an  information  world.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  "raw"  data, 
because to enter into presence means to enter into form. Information is part and parcel of the standard model. And this is why explorations into 
formlessness are always so profound, often bordering on disorientation, shock, or horror.

3

For  these  reasons  it  is  indeed  possible  to  think  the  event  as  analog event. Following Deleuze, analog events illustrate an immanent relation. 

Not pure immanence per se, but a relation of givenness that strives toward immanence. (The analog is always "aspirational" in this sense.) Information is the ultimate analog event: a "something" is given and enters into a relation with itself as specific identity of the same, in the same proportion, in the same way and manner, in a continuously variable immediacy with  itself.  The  analog  event  par  excellence  therefore  is  nothing  more 
than the event of self- similarity.Yet  this  is  only  the  most  elemental  description  of  the  analog  event. 
Broader,  more  prosaic  phenomena  can  also  be  understood  as  analog events. In fact all phenomena are given within a world and thus derive 
their fundamental identity via such relation  to givenness. These  kinds  of events are not rare. They include all manner of continuous di)erentiation, autopoiesis, and individuation. Frogs and birds and subatomic particles are thus analog events as such by virtue of their consistency as 
objects.

    77 26/08/2014   5:06:13 PM

78  Events

But is there a contradiction? It depends on whether the term analog  is interpreted strictly or loosely. In the previous chapter we observed a 
strict interpretation: there are no analog events (only analog prevents) because analogicity means a full integration and collapse of the two into 
the one. Yet now a loose interpretation is also available: analog events are indeed possible because analogicity means a provisional reconciliation 
of  the  two  into  a  relation  of  pseudo- identity  as  one.  In  other  words, within the standard model-- which is by de!nition the realm of digitality, distinction, separation, di)erentiation-- analog events do exist pre-cisely  because  objects  persist  as  self- similar.  Objects  may  morph  and 
change, of course, but the analog event is the event of championing rec-onciliation over riven ness and union over division. The analog event is 
the event of the same.
Second path: digital events. To recap, the event is a relation. The event is a relation when it is understood in terms of analogy. The analog relation 
is the desire to overcome the rivenness of being by way of a continuous, proportionate, aspiration toward an image of the same self. As information or "data structure," the givens exist as a structure of relation. Hence information combines both brute facticity of substance and the form or 
architecture of relation that such substance assumes. Any deeper expla-nations are moot, because under the standard model no substance can 
exist apart from form, and no form can exist uncoupled from substance. To exist means to appear as presence, and hence to relate back to one's 
own givenness. And the reverse too: to relate means to span a di)erential of states, and thus to be outside of one's self (to ex- ist).

Following this logic, then, the analog event is clearly part of the archi-tecture of being. But what of the digital event? If the analog event means 
the continuous aspiration toward the same, how to consider the digital?To answer the question it is necessary to advance past simple relation 
and consider decisional relation. To consider event as decision is to con-sider the event from the perspective of willed action. (Again there is no 
reason to be anthropocentric; trees and bees can exhibit willed action as here de!ned.)

Whenever there exists a spectrum or continuum of intensities, there exists immanence. This is why the two becoming one is an immanence, 
why  analogy  is  an  immanence,  and  why  immanence  implies  analogy. Conversely, whenever there exists di)erence or discontinuous states, there 

    78 26/08/2014   5:06:13 PM

  Events  79
exists the transcendental. This is why the one becoming two necessitates the transcendental; why digitality implies the transcendental, and why 
the transcendental implies digitality. To call relations "decisional" is to underscore the fact that they are about cutting, that they follow a deviation from the state of a)airs. A synonym would be "trenchant relations" or "trenchant events."

Such is the theory of the event provided by Badiou. For him events  are trenchant deviations from the state of the situation. They interrupt 
and  depart  from  being.  The  event  is  a  "pure  outside."  Such  events  are rare,  relatively  speaking-- at  least  much  rarer  than  Deleuzian  events. 
Badiousian events are attached to subject formation, and, specifically, a set of procedures that a subject can pursue in order to become subject to 
truth. Badiou's theory of the event is thus properly labeled "voluntarist" in  that  it  requires  the  active  will  of  conscripted  militants  who  seek  to 
execute the event.If Lenin is the  ultimate Badiousian, the  ultimate Deleuzians are the 
heat vortexes of thermodynamic systems, or enzymes during RNA tran-scription. The Badiousian event deviates from the state of the situation, 
inaugurating new paths  for a  subject's  !delity to  truth.  The  Deleuzian event  subtends  all  matter,  catalyzing  action  and  reaction  within  the 
immanent transformations of pure becoming.Now  the  full  meaning  of  event  as  decision  is  becoming  clear.  Such 
events  are  a  cutting  or  separation.  But  they  are  also  will- dependent-- whatever kind of "will" that might be, the will of gravity, the will of the 
sovereign,  or  the  will  of  the  acorn.  So  while  event  as  relation  implies existence, event as decision implies something else entirely: persistence 
or insistence. (The ultimate question therefore will be that of time: ana-log  events  focus  on  the  present,  digital  events  the  future.)  If  relations  
are the things that merely exist, decisions are the things that persist. To cut means to insist on cutting. To be cut means to persist in the wake of 
the cut. And, as the transcendental demonstrates, whatever undergoes division must "insist" that it remain the same in order to persist as such. 
A  nexus  of  terms  thus  converges:  digitality, transcendental,  insistence, and decision. Each works in concert with the others.

Decisional events mean change, change in the normal everyday sense of the word. Decisional events mean action, process, or transformation. 
Change, as event, is a digital decision. Event as decision combines both static snapshot and active transformation. It is the realm not so much of 

    79 26/08/2014   5:06:13 PM

8;  Events
data as of code, for although data exist, code insists a specific manner  of execution. Executables, "machine acts," or code-- these are all euphemisms for decisional events. Hence event as decision points directly to the arenas of mediation, synthesis, language, the political, the ideas of 
the world, ideology, or protocol. Perhaps this is why Laruelle is so inter-ested in the performative dimension of philosophy, in those things that 
"say what they do and do what they say."4The givens exist, while events insist. But how exactly? There are two 
main force vectors at play, one moving up the chain from the data to the decision, and the other moving down the chain from the decision to the 
data. The downward movement is the movement of reality. Such move-ment (ows from the event to the givens. It reveals a kind of realism, but 
a realism driven by pessimism and an unexplainable yearning for brute physicality. Synonyms include actualization, rei!cation, alienation, objecti!cation, realpolitik, and neutralization.Running in opposition to the movement of reality is the movement of 
freedom. This second vector runs from the givens to the event. It states, axiomatically,  that  the  givens  appear,  naturally  and  spontaneously,  as 
fodder to be encoded. It states in essence, following Badiou, that although there are only bodies and languages, it is possible to deviate from bodies 
and languages by way of events. To follow the movement of freedom re-veals how the givens predate the event and compels the givens to engage 
in the event.Note  the  counterintuitive  tendency  at play  here.  It might  seem  that 
going from the givens to the event is repressive or reactionary in the sense that the gaining of an encoded event, such as ideological interpellation, 
could only ever inhibit the so- called natural existence and operations of the givens, and that, by contrast, going from the event to the givens is 
liberating or progressive in the sense that the givens are "more real" than the arti!ce of the encoded event. But this is not entirely the case. The 
movement of freedom is, quite literally, opposed to reality. It is irreal and illiberal. The goal of the decisional event therefore is not to reduce social 
conditions to realpolitik, to autonomous realities, or to the various prag-matic realisms. Rather, the movement of freedom seeks an elevated arti!ce, an arti!ce constructed not simply from data, but from data as they are assembled within relational and decisional events. Laruelle calls these 
!ctions, arti!ces, or performations.

    80 26/08/2014   5:06:13 PM

  Events  8:

To move closer to the fully encoded event means to move closer to freedom. The entity that is the most free is the one that is the most fully 
folded into the supernature, the one most intimately allied with history and with the real exigencies of matter, because that is  where the trenchant  events  lie.  Using  terminology  from  literary  criticism  and  media studies, we can say that the movement of freedom is the movement out 
of the world- bound, diegetic realm and into the non- world- bound, non- diegetic realm. Consequently, the entity that is the most free is also the 
entity that is closest to the sociopolitical sphere. In other words the more one pursues the decisional event, the more one is free. The greater the 
insistence, the greater the freedom.Consider the famous slogan from Stewart Brand, "Information wants to 
be free." We are now in a position to reconsider its deeper meaning. Data, as a given, want to be free, free as evental information. Digital freedom is 
thus a question of being "free from" the autonomy of data. Counterintu-itively, then, the movement of freedom is driven not by liberation but by 
increased imbrication with the sociopolitical sphere. It is driven not by a force of loosening but by tightening, not by a newfound (exi bility or laxity 
of structure but by discipline, not by the peace of the real but by the violence of the material. And, as Badiou says, because it tends toward the political 
sphere populated by political factions and political agents, the movement of freedom will always take as its goal the formation of new subjectivities.

But Laruelle, as will become evident in a moment, o)ers still another alternative. He parts ways with both Badiou and Deleuze on the question 
of the event. For him events are not heroic, as they must be for Badiou, and they do not depart from being. Laruelle has little interest in cultivating new subject positions. Events do not create heroes-- or if they do, he wishes no part in it.

5 But likewise Laruelle di)ers from Deleuze, for while 

Deleuze makes the event coterminous with being, Laruelle will addition-ally  show that the only true theory of the  event is one  that withdraws 

absolutely from both relation and decision.6
Thesis VIII. Being is an evental mode; it is coterminous with the event. Before he describes the event as such, Laruelle begins with a much more 
prosaic  description  of  the  actually  existing  world.  The  world  and  the event are, quite literally the same thing; hence Laruelle speaks of them in 
terms of the "event- world."

    81 26/08/2014   5:06:13 PM

8!  Events

Consider the as- structure and the way in which it frames all the entities of the world as both "aspect of " and "relation to." Consider Whitehead's 
prehensions  and  actual  occasions.  Consider  the  principle  of  sufficient reason, namely that an actual entity and an actual reason are coterminous. Consider simply how being is preconditioned on "reasons": ratio-nales,  relations,  structures,  formations,  decisions,  and  events.  And  the 
reverse as well: wherever events pertain, one may be sure to !nd being. The historicity of being is also the historicity of the event.

Such a modal condition is what Laruelle calls the event- world. We can think of it as a direct extension of the standard model. "The event is not 
merely the result of superimposing an ontology onto a history," Laruelle claims. "It appears whenever there is a repression, a cutting, or a collapsing of Being."7There are a number of ways to demonstrate this, but the most straightforward  is  to  return  to  the  notion  of  relation  as  it  was  previously  dis-cussed.  To  speak  of  being,  in  the  framing  of  the  grand  illusion,  is  to  
speak  of  the  distinction  between  object  and  relation,  or  between  data and  information.  By  de!nition,  being  is  never  purely  immanent  with 
itself. Even the most immanence- focused philosophies of being, such as those of Deleuze or Henry, rely on di)erentials and distinctions between 
states or modes. In fact immanence itself is often understood more as  a resolution of division than as an always- already uni!ed condition of 
pure singularity.8Thus,  because  being  is  never  purely  immanent  with  itself,  it  must 
address  the  question  of  relation.  It  must  "repress,"  "cut,"  "collapse,"  or otherwise come to terms with distinction. Sometimes relation is more or 
less resolved, for example, into immanence. Sometimes relation is given a starring role in the architecture of being, as with the dialectic. Sometimes  it  is  starved  and  whittled  down  to  nothing,  as  with  the  generic. And, as in the case of continuous being, relation alights onto the surface 
of being, like a ripple of peaks and valleys, surging and falling.
The event- world is the result of a structural and synchronic digitization. But the event itself, as prevent, is neither a decision nor a relation, neither digital nor analog. Previously we said that the one is unconnected to the event, suggesting instead that the one be considered in terms of 
the advent or prevent. Let me now try to derive that architecture. What 

    82 26/08/2014   5:06:13 PM

  Events  83
is the structure of the event- world? And how is the event- world related to the event itself?

To repeat: thinking the analog event means thinking the event as rela-tion; but thinking the digital event means thinking the event as decision. 
Laruelle combines both arms of the event by showing how relationality as such (that is, a world of "information" in which entities form relations) 
is itself a decision within ontology. In other words, the most important decision  is  the  decision  to  inaugurate  relationality  as  such.  The  most 
important digitization is the digitization of the analog.The event- world, de!ned as the given world in which events take place, 
exists itself in a relationship of digitization vis- a`- vis the prevent of the one. For Laruelle the decision to establish philosophy-- philosophy as  reflection, convertibility, reversibility, interfacing, and so on-- is a dig ital event. (Undoubtedly, to abstain from doing philosophy is not simply a new digitization, a new decision in silhouette. If it were, it would remain trapped as a philosophical abstention from philosophy and therefore no abstention at all! Rather, to abstain from decision means to practice an ana-logical science that operates, as Laruelle puts it, "according to" the one.)

Deleuze,  in  a  passage  from  Di#erence  and  Repetition,  explains  this  scenario most eloquently: "Univocity signi!es that being itself is univocal, while that of which it is  said is equivocal: precisely the opposite of analogy. . . . It is not analogous being which is distributed among the categories  and  allocates  a  !xed  part  to  beings,  but  the  beings  which  are distributed across the space of univocal being, opened by all the forms."

9 

What this means is that the relation of the one to the multiple is not a relationship of analogy. Or, to put it another way, the event of being, as 

the advent of the division between one and many or between being and existing, stems from a digitization (not an analogicity). For if it were not 
a digitization, then the worldly manifestations of the one would them-selves also have to be, by analogy, one, rather than multiple. Yet because 
digitization implies distinction, the one can manifest itself in the world as  multiple  multiplicities,  which  themselves  nevertheless  still  speak  in 
the same voice of a generic oneness.The one- multiple, as evental and causal relation, is therefore a two- 
way split of digital and analog relations. From one aspect, digital. From another, analog. To think univocity in terms of equivocity is a movement 
of the digital. But to think equivocity in terms of univocity is a movement 

    83 26/08/2014   5:06:13 PM

84  Events
of the analog. Shifting the orientation of perspective is crucial. The real causes the multiple, both unilaterally and irreversibly. And the real also 
causes it transcendentally, and hence must do so digitally. But as multi-ple, the equivocal things of the world all stand in a reverse relationship 
of analogicity back to the one.Creation  is  digital,  but  the  lived  existence  of  the  created  is  analog.  
To be born is to break with the past, but to live is to act in !delity to it. Unilateral  means  the  one  is  oblivious  of  the  two,  insisting  on  its  own  
oneness, but duality means the two bonds in an identity with the one. Laruelle's "unilateral duality" should be understood in precisely this way. 
As unilateral it follows digital distinction, while as duality it follows ana-log integration.

The  event  as  indecision  and  indi$erence.  Thus  far  the  event  has  been considered as either relation or decision. Now the event can be understood in completely di)erent terms, as a kind of static preemption rooted in indecision and indi)erence.

10

To say that the event is an indecision is to say that the event is the sus-pension of the evental regime itself, the regime described previously as 

relation- decision. Following Heidegger, being is given from out of a pri-mordial event. And hence, following Badiou, for beings to actuate events 
they must somehow echo the primordial event, supersede being a sec-ond time and leave it behind. Yet such a scenario is still too metaphysical 
for Laruelle, who suggests that the only properly radical theory of the event  must begin  not  from decision  (Badiou)  but  from the  indecision  
of generic immanence. The only true theory of the event-- a theory ade-quate to the one-- is a theory of the event that withdraws absolutely from 
both relation and decision.So the one is not a simple object, and certainly no kind of All- One 
super- object. Neither is the one a relation-- the warning heard time and again in Laruelle. The one is best understood as an event.

The one is no kind of colloidal substance or "grey goo," and likewise not an absolute reality, much less an absolute mind. Terms like realism or 
idealism help very little. To say that the one is an event is not to subscribe to something like a "process philosophy" attributed rightly or wrongly  
to !gures like Whitehead or Deleuze. Process is very important, but it pertains to the standard model, not the static preemption of the one. So, 

    84 26/08/2014   5:06:13 PM

  Events  85
because the one is, by de!nition, the unilateralization of process, it makes little sense to speak of it in terms of process philosophy.

Rather, the one is the event of indi)erence. In withdrawing from both relation and decision, the one is more a question of leaving being than 
being itself. The one is a waning of presence, a withering of being. Both the givens and the given events must be abandoned; both data and information abandoned. Not so much a movement of freedom or a movement of reality, the event of the one is a movement of subtraction in which presence is whittled down to the radical anonymity of something whatsoever.Indi)erence is incompatible with the "philosophies of di)erence" catalogued by Laruelle in his book of that name. These philosophies have always been driven by a therapeutic aim. First the primordial alienation 
chronicled  by  Marx,  but  later  the  alienation  of  subjective  identity  via  di)erence and the deeper ontological di)erence embedded inside metaphysics. These are the various sites of the grand traumas. These are the sca)olding of a traumatized being. They inaugurate the great therapeutic crusades: Marxism, phenomenology, psychoanalysis, deconstruction, or identity politics.

Deleuze's description in The Logic of Sense of the stoicism of Joe" Bous-quet, the French surrealist poet who was paralyzed in World War I, could 
not paint a better picture: "My wound existed before me, I was born to embody it."

11 (Indeed on this point, Badiou's subsequent theory of the 

event sounds like a mere echo of earlier passages written by Deleuze.)Indi)erence is incompatible with all of this. There is no identity but 

real identity. There is no deconstruction of the one. The fractures and traumas, which Marxism or psychoanalysis were invented to solve, are 
merely !gments of a more general trauma, the nihilism of the reality of the standard model. Thus take caution not to think indi)erence or indecision in terms of trauma or fragmentation, and likewise not to structure indi)erence  or  indecision  in  terms  of  a  therapeutic  strategy.  The  vital 
question today is not to rehabilitate being, and certainly not to protect and  promote  new  "health  mandates"  or  "medical  interventions,"  but 
rather  to  demilitarize  this  life, to  stand  down,  to  de- organize  and  un- manage it into a condition of indi)erence rooted in indecision.

Some will label this a kind of milksop quietism. Some will view Laruelle as nothing more than a license to do nothing. But to view Laruelle in this 
way is to  misunderstand  the full force of insuficientcy and  indecision. 

    85 26/08/2014   5:06:13 PM

86  Events
The withdrawal from the standard model is as assertive as it is passive, as disruptive as it is peaceful.

For this reason Laruelle stands at the threshold of a new theory of the event. The question for him, as he often repeats, is not so much the decision of philosophy but the indecision of philosophy. Not so much philo-sophical  di)erence  but  philosophical  indi)erence.  The  point  is  not  to 
revisit a kind of existentialism or nihilism ("Being withdraws from us"), but precisely the opposite, a kind of deterritorialization of the very terms 
of the ontological arrangement ("We withdraw from being"). The point is thus ultimately not a new enchantment of being- given, but the profound disenchantment of leaving- being.Something is out there. And "it gives." But whatever it is, it is not being 
as we know it today. It is, rather, a cancellation, a privative or subtractive event  that  brings  us  closer  to  the  generic  univocity  of  the  one.  (And 
again we should repress the urge to think of the one as a kind of proxy for God;  the  one  is  merely  and  modestly  the  undoing  of  the  standard 
model, nothing more.)In this sense, no language of repression or liberation will help. This  
is not Freud in "#,0 or Marcuse in "#$/. This is not about muzzling or uncorking the desiring machines. Likewise it is not about !nding truth 
in  a  departure  from  the  state  of  the  situation.  If  anything,  Badiou  is standing on his head; he must be put back on his feet again: the event is 
the only radical real and thus is part of being, yet leaving- being brings us closer to the "void" of the whatever.

If  information  shines  a  light  on  relationships  of  identity  and  di)er-ence, and if the event- world shows a society in which information entities (humans, strands of DNA, operating systems) enter into networking relationships bound by protocological control, then the  event as indecision  reveals  a  structure  of  notworking  relationships,  a  cosmological de'soeuvrement, an inexistentialism, the pure event that withdraws from 
presence. After the movement of subtraction takes place, the pure event as prevent takes over where being once stood. Being is thus no longer the 
most fundamental question for thinking. Instead, the pure event what-soever (the prevent) happens. Merely happens.

The event as static and !nal. Entities understood from the perspective of the prevent are, in this way, both static and !nal. Static entities belong to 

    86 26/08/2014   5:06:13 PM

  Events  87
the commonality of the entire class of objects, rather than being instanti-ated over and  over again  along with  individual  objects. To say "static" 
means to say that something is generic to the class. From one perspective the static nature of entities can be contrasted to "the dynamic," but from 
another  perspective  this  logic  falls  apart.  In  fact  the  static  is  the  most dynamic in that it is never instantiated in one particular appearance. It 
belongs to the entity at large, in its pure commonality. Not a local dyna-mism of the (exible instantiations of being, the static aspect of an entity 
is a total dynamism of the common.But entities understood from the perspective of the prevent are also 
labeled  "!nal."  This  means  that  their  static  aspect  can  never  again  be changed. Just as they are static (generic to the class), they are also !nal 
(generic to the ontological condition). As common, entities refuse fur-ther  modi!cation.  Genericity,  as  something  whatsoever,  is  thus  both 
static and !nal. This is another way to understand why entities are des-tinies  determined  by  the  one.  They  are  radically  determined  by  the 
supernatural base-- determined "in the last instance" says Laruelle-- and likewise  destined  toward  their  own  generic  commonality,  as  the  only 

thing that, in the last instance, is truly their own.
The movement of something. Such are the elemental conditions of the third  movement.  After  the  movement  of  freedom  and  the  movement  
of reality, there  is the movement  of something. The one  is  not the  void (Heidegger, Sartre, Badiou). It is likewise not the "other" as de!ned by 
post- structuralism. If anything it is the "something or other."If the movement of freedom means politicization and the movement 
of  reality  means  depoliticization,  then  the  movement  of  something opens up onto a di)erent kind of landscape, an ancient landscape, but 
one nevertheless still being understood and reinvented for today. Some-thing whatsoever resides within the prevent. And from this blank spot 
on the map, the something whatsoever aggresses (in prevention) toward the realm of the event as mere event.

The  movement  of  something  has  absolutely  no  intention  of  taking over for the event as mere event. It has no such aspiration. In contrast  
to the movement of freedom, which moves from the givens to the event, the movement of something deprives the givens of their givenness and 
the event of its evental state. In this way the movement of something is 

    87 26/08/2014   5:06:13 PM

88  Events
never a hypertrophy of freedom. It is, if anything, a reversal of direction: to aggress toward the givens and the event through the act of standing 
down (leaving- being).Heidegger saw this intuitively, even if he shied away from accepting  
its full repercussions. "The event of appropriation," wrote Heidegger, "is that realm, vibrating within itself, through which man and Being reach 
each  other  in  their  nature,  achieve  their  active  nature  by  losing  those qualities with which metaphysics has endowed them."

12 In this way, the 

generic univocity of being does not mean monism exactly (unity), and  it  does  not  simply  mean  that  being  speaks  as  the  one  (univocity),  but 

instead  it  means  the  loss  of  qualities,  the  voice  of  being  as  someone (anonymous).

The  movement  of  something  is  not,  strictly  speaking,  opposed  to, beyond, under, or transcendent from either the first movement (toward 
reality) or the second movement (toward freedom), either the !xation on the givens or the !xation on the event, either realism or materialism. 
During the movement of the impersonal, something subtracts from both movements and thus is without matter and without the real. It is both an 
antimatter and an irreality.The movement of something says: "If you have something whatever, 
you shall retain it; but if you have nothing, you will lose even more of nothing, up until the point of your impersonality." So while the movement of something may resemble nihilism, it is in fact slightly di)erent, not so much a nothing- ism but a something- ism, a quiddism.

"In the perfect crime," wrote Baudrillard, "it is the perfection that is criminal."

13 The prevent means both "to stop or hinder" and "from what 

comes before the event." What does the prevent prevent but the catastro-phe, the perfect crime of politics? The (mere) event is always the perfect 

crime, because its perfection is a completion of the real world. And in its perfect completion the real is eliminated. The prevent prevents the event 
from occurring.But prevent also means what comes before the event, the a priori. The 
realm of the prevent does not present an additive predicate to an entity. Thus the only judgments that the prevent will con!rm are those traditionally labeled the "analytic a priori," which is to say, those that come before the event and that do not present additive predicates. If the mundane event a*rms a normative judgment of the form "One ought to act 

    88 26/08/2014   5:06:13 PM

  Events  89
in such and such a way," and the givens a*rm predicated judgment of the form "a is b," the prevent a*rms the most elemental form of statement: Something is whatsoever it is.
All  the  necessary  topics  are  now  on  the  table.  We  have  o)ered  a  brief snapshot  of  Laruelle's  project,  including  his  take  on  the  philosophical 
decision and the principle of sufficient philosophy. Some attention was given to the one and its actualization into the four modes of being that 
are contained in the standard model. Then, because the standard model is premised on the division of the one in two, we spent some time de!ning both the digital and analog, with an eye to how these terms relate to existing theoretical discourse. Finally, we considered the division of the 
one in two as an event itself, an event of decision. This entailed a discus-sion of other kinds of events that aren't decisions, namely relation events 
and indecision events.Now  the  question  remains:  How  does  Laruelle  withdraw  from  the 
standard model? What is Laruelle's stance on digitality? When Laruelle unilateralizes  the  standard  model  does  he  not  also  unilateralize  digitality? How is Laruelle "against the digital"? And what is the future of the digital?

Admittedly the Against . . . of my title is not entirely Laruellean, since "being  against"  reinstates  the  philosophical  decision  and  the  resultant 
amphibology between two things. But as Laruelle himself admits, given the pervasiveness of the philosophical world, it is often necessary to speak 
using existing philosophical language even if the goal is something other than philosophy.

Laruelle is against the digital, but do not assume that, in withdraw- ing from the digital, he will necessarily !nd refuge in the analog. Laruelle 
is just as uninterested in the analog as he is the digital. In fact, following Laruelle,  it  is  possible  to  conceive  of  analogy  as  simply  a  subordinate 
mode of digitality, because analogy is still a kind of distinction like any-thing else. So in his withdrawal from digitality, Laruelle is charting an 
exodus out of representation more generally. Thus, the true withdrawal from digitality will lead to immanence, not analogy. The ultimate withdrawal from digitality will lead to the generic.

    89 26/08/2014   5:06:13 PM

!"#$%&'()%#*+)*+#,*'--.%-)/+%0-'*1%
Pa r t   I I

Withdrawing from the 
Standard Model

    91 26/08/2014   5:06:13 PM

f i v e
Computers

To launch Part II, let me pause brie(y and recapitulate the overall trajec-tory. Arguments often gain  their impetus  through opposition to  some 
sort of conventional  wisdom, in  the  hope  of  amending,  modifying, or even reversing it. Conventional wisdom today de!nes the digital in terms 
of zeros and ones. This is not entirely false, and indeed completely true for that particular mode of digitality known as binary or base- two numerical notation. But binary mathematics is a relatively small subset of digi-tality in general, which has many avatars across the  !elds of ontology, 
political theory, aesthetics, and beyond. Even for binary mathematics, the zero and the one are mere tokens enacting their required roles within a 
more important logic, the logic of distinction, decision, di)erence, and division; other tokens could be swapped in and the digital system would 
work just as well: on and o), A and B, or you and me.Such logic of decision provides the fuel for this book and allows us to 
explore the logic for its own sake. But further, decision also discloses, via silhouette, a strange science !ction universe in which such distinction 
no longer holds. Of all thinkers who address such questions, Laruelle is best suited for the task, because he is the one who has pursued the non- 
digital path most fervently and rigorously.Although zero might elucidate the void and one the plenum-- or as 
George Boole called them, the "Nothing" and the "Universe"-- zero and one  are  ultimately  most  valuable  for  the  two- structure  they  facilitate. 
Distinction requires an understanding of zero and one in terms of a rela-tionship of two. Thus the most important step in the comprehension of 

93

    93 26/08/2014   5:06:14 PM

94  Computers
digitality is to shift from the former to the latter, from zero and one to one and two.

In  part  I  we  de!ned  the  digital  and  the  analog  in  terms  of  the  one dividing in two and the two integrating in one. This in turn evokes the 
topic of the one itself, and the one's role in philosophy not as a first cause or "absolute reality" but rather as a preventative force of static preemption bent not on furthering the essence of thought or being but virtual-izing them together into a metastasis of pure immanence.

But, if the one is purely and radically immanent, the existence of the world as given requires some explanation. Thus the advent, or the synchronic and structural "event of appropriation," arrives as a digitization of the one. This is known as the "grand illusion" of actual worldly presence: things belong together, minds with bodies, entities with relations, beings with their own rationales for being.

In chapter - we described the various aspects of the standard model via four epithets of being: the a*rmative transcendental of di)erential being, 
the negative transcendental of dialectical being, the a*rmative imma-nence of continuous being, and the negative immanence of generic being.

Next, in order to plumb the relation between being and the one, it was necessary to show that the relation is not a relation, in fact, but an event. 
Hence a mediation on the event: first, the event as relation, in the form of data or "the things having been given"; second, the event as decision, 
both  as  willed  events,  but  also  the  grand decision  itself  of  philosophy, understood as the decision to view the world in terms of data in relation; 
and, third, the much more radical de!nition of event as prevent, or the determination  of  decision  (and  hence  ultimately  the  determination  of 
relation too). The spectrum of the event spans three zones, not simply relation and decision, but ultimately indecision or destiny.

To initiate the discussion of how to withdraw from the standard model, we  now  take  a  brief  intermission  from  Laruelle  and  consider  a  very  
particular aspect of Deleuze. In some  ways Deleuze  is the  single most in(uential philosopher of our times. So many things that have happened 
in  society  and  culture  over  the  past  thirty  or  forty  years  were  chroni- cled  at  length  in  one  or  more  of  his  books.  Horizontality  rather  than 
verticality; surface over depth; the breakdown of the Freudian subject; a)ect instead of emotion; assemblages and multiplicities; rhizomes and 

    94 26/08/2014   5:06:14 PM

  Computers  95
distributed  net works;  pure  immanence;  a*rmation  and  expression-- these are just some of the many aspects of the Deleuzian world in which 
we currently live.In "#%% Laruelle printed a !ve- page "Letter to Deleuze" in The Philosophical  Decision, the journal  that Laruelle published during the  years "#%+- %#.

1 In the letter Laruelle scolds and castigates Deleuze on his treatment  of  Spinoza,  and  then  proceeds  to  lecture  him  on  the  di)erences between philosophy and non- philosophy by way of a thirty- point summary of its basic terms: "By philosophical decision I mean . . . by real I mean . . . by !nite I mean . . ." and so on.

Deleuze likely read the letter, or at least we know Deleuze was cog-nizant of Laruelle at the time because he mentioned Laruelle brie(y in 
the "##" Deleuze and Guattari book What Is Philosophy? The reference was most certainly intended as a friendly tip of the hat to Laruelle, then 
still an emerging !gure in France and with no international reputation to speak of.

But  Laruelle's  "#%%  letter  to  Deleuze  was  just  an  overture.  Despite Deleuze  and  Guattari's  friendly  intentions,  Laruelle  considered  it  the 
lowest insult to be brought "into the fold," because in his mind Deleuze was a philosopher like any other. A more thorough "Response to Deleuze" 
appeared in "##0 outlining Laruelle's rather dim opinion of his brother in immanence. For how could anyone with his name on a book called What 
Is Philosophy? ever come out alive? No good deed goes unpunished, and Deleuze  was  likely  caught  o)  guard  by  the  sour  response  he  received 
from Laruelle.Laruelle's squeamishness toward Deleuze aside, shall we not pose the 
question directly: Is Deleuze a friend to Laruelle? Is Deleuze really a philo-sopher, in Laruelle's terms? And, philosopher or not, can Deleuze's analysis of computers help us understand the theme of digitality in Laruelle?There  are  many  references  to  Deleuze  in  Laruelle's  work.  But  is  he 
friend  or  foe?  Consider  Deleuze  the  philosophical  realist  who  so  val-iantly resists metaphysical logic. Consider Deleuze the thinker of immanence, a deep commitment to immanence surpassed only by Henry, and surpassed eventually and most de!nitively by Laruelle himself. Laruelle 
tends to hold Deleuze at arm's length, but such treatment of other authors is par for the course in Laruelle. In fact Laruelle and Deleuze are similar 
in a number of ways.

    95 26/08/2014   5:06:14 PM

96  Computers

Given  his  importance,  Deleuze  has  been  exhaustively  parsed  and studied by any number of people, from artists and activists, to dot- com 
libertarians, to military theorists, to humanists and social scientists of all shapes and sizes. Without wishing to dispute or duplicate this literature, 
I focus  here  on  a  particular  text,  Deleuze's  late  "Postscript  on  Control Societies,"  and  pursue  a  very  particular  goal,  Deleuze's  relationship  to 
computers.Because he is so central to contemporary debates, many assume that 
Deleuze has a fully formed theory of the digital, but in truth of fact he doesn't. Deleuze's theory of the digital needs to be assembled piece by 
piece. By the end of this interlude, we will return to Laruelle and connect Deleuze's theory of computers back to the standard model and its pervasive digitality.
Could it be? Could it be that Deleuze's most lasting legacy will consist of %,&)) words from #**)? We are all Deleuzians today; that much is clear. 
But the vital question is which Deleuze? Two basic factions have emerged. First are those who think Deleuze describes resistance and (ight from 
power, and second those who think Deleuze describes power itself, the very structure of organization and control. The first are today's post- Web 
liberals,  ahistorical  but  enlightened  ("Everything  is  a  rhizomatic  sys-tem"), the second are the historical materialists, a label no less gauche for 
being accurate ("Let us historicize and critique these systems, because they proliferate injustice"). In short, the line- of- (ighters and the society- 

of- controllers. The Deleuze of "#+- and the Deleuze of "##,.Deleuze's late essay "Postscript on Control Societies" is a strange little 
text.  It  bears  not  the  same  Deleuzian  voice  so  familiar  from  his  other writings. Cynics will grumble it falls short of the great books of "#$%- $# 
or the radical collaborations with Fe'lix Guattari during the "#+,s. The text claims no more than a single paragraph in Franc,ois Dosse's biography of Deleuze and Guattari.2 A di)erent voice resonates here, a more directly political voice, and barring the Guattari collaborations a voice 
less  commonly  heard  in  Deleuze's  writings.  To  be  sure,  Deleuze  was always a political thinker and remained politically committed in various 
ways throughout his life. But the "Postscript" is di)erent."Today,  I  can  say  that  I  feel  completely  Marxist,"  he  admitted  in  a  
late interview published posthumously. "The article I published on the `society of control,' for example, is completely Marxist, even though I am 

    96 26/08/2014   5:06:14 PM

  Computers  97
writing on things that Marx knew nothing about."3 Indeed in the article he indicts capitalism by name. He raises his wrath against corporations 
and television shows. Yet his frame is not just the mode of production, but also the culture at large. He talks about snakes and surfers and other 
features of the dawning millennium. He references Roberto Rossellini, Paul Virilio, Franz Kafka, and most important Michel Foucault. He tells 
us  exactly  what  is  wrong  with  the  business  sector,  as  well  as  with  the prisons, schools, and hospitals. It reads almost like a manifesto, the "Manifesto on Control Societies."Manifestos  are  always about two things: the  desires and  the  details. 
This is what we want; and we want it here, and in this manner. When the May "#$% revolts broke out in France, Philippe Sollers, along with Julia 
Kristeva, Jean- Joseph Goux, Jean- Louis Baudry, and a band of other sig-natories,  wrote  "The  Revolution  Here  and  Now:  Seven  Points,"  listing 
their grievances point by point.4 And-- they added at the end-- we shall meet on Wednesdays at nine o'clock on the rue de Rennes.

This is the crux of the cahiers de dole'ances refrain, reprised recently  in the closing sections of Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri's Multitude: 
Say what you want, and be specific about it.The year of Deleuze's death, "##0, was a good year for the manifesto. 
The Unabomber's "Industrial Society and the Future" advocated the com-plete destruction of what he called the "industrial- technological system." 
That same year the Dogme '#0 "Vow of Chastity" signed by !lmmakers Lars  Von  Trier  and  Thomas  Vinterberg  o)ered  the  closest  thing  to  a 
manifesto seen in the cinema for some time. The Vow is as short as the Unabomber's is long, but it is detailed, detailed, detailed. Dogme !lmmakers must !lm on location, in color, on Academy .0mm stock, and use concurrent diegetic sound.

Ten years earlier, a computer engineer named Richard Stallman wrote the "GNU Manifesto." The number of legitimate manifestos written by 
computer geeks can be counted on one hand-- the VNS Matrix "Cyber-feminist Manifesto" and Eben Moglen's "The dotCommunist Manifesto" 
also come to mind. But despite its inauspicious source, Stallman's docu-ment had profound e)ects on the "industrial- technological system," and 
most all of them good.Detailed, like the others, Stallman's manifesto calls for the creation of 
a free Unix- compatible software system, including a C compiler and a linker, a text editor, and a few dozen other free software applications. He 

    97 26/08/2014   5:06:14 PM

98  Computers
names the make and model of the computer his system will run on. He rebuts, preemptively, eleven  specific  objections  raised  by  his would- be 
critics. (Stallman even calls for a software tax to underwrite the develop-ment of free code.) Most important, the manifesto calls for a "stay free" 
legal armature for copyright holders, known today as the GNU General Public License.

Such was the intellectual climate that produced the "Postscript on Con-trol  Societies."  No  computer- savvy  intellectual  was  Deleuze.  He  likely 
had never heard of Stallman's manifesto, much less read it. Nevertheless, scattered  across  his  oeuvre,  and  particularly  in  his  late  work,  Deleuze  
has unwittingly made signi!cant contributions to the contemporary dis-course  on  computing,  cybernetics,  networks,  and  digitality.  From  the 
concepts of the rhizome and the virtual, to his occasional interjections on the digital versus the analog, and to the notion of control society from 
the "Postscript," there is a case to be made that Deleuze, although rarely mentioning computers directly, has dramatically in(uenced today's discourse on digital media. Indeed, it makes sense given how cybernetics had in(uenced much of French theory in the latter twentieth century.

5

One of the most in(uential aspects of the "Postscript," particularly to my own thinking, is how it asserts so trenchantly that things are not getting any better. Digitality is a problem, not a panacea. Planetary neolib-eralism is a boondoggle not a deliverance. The snake is even worse than 
the mole. For critics working in the shadow of the dot- com boom, such o)erings  from  Deleuze  furnished  a  welcome  dose  of  encouragement 
needed to combat the nai"ve utopian babble of the California ideology.Deleuze  was  always  good  at  drawing  lines  in  the  sand.  One  of  the 
things that makes Deleuze such a pleasure to read is his clear construal of the theater of enemies. They are excellent enemies. Not just information technologies and the life sciences, but Plato, Hegel, and Descartes-- elite  enemies,  all  of  whom  have  committed  the  most  egregious  error. 
Here is one point where Laruelle and Deleuze agree, for each of these philosophical enemies has assented to the classical condition of philosophy. Each admits to  an up/down distinction between idea and matter, between essence and instance, between Being and beings.

The  "Postscript" does not draw the  line  so  much in  terms of meta-physics. There the complaint is articulated in terms of control, communication, and the "harshest con!nement" wrought by "the new monster" 

    98 26/08/2014   5:06:14 PM

  Computers  99
of information society ("+%).6 Deleuze credits the term to William Bur-roughs, but the true source for "control" is no mystery.

7 Follow a thread 

from nineteenth- century thermodynamics and (uid dynamics through statistical  mathematics,  weather  prediction,  and  nonlinear  systems  to 

terminate  in  "#/%  with  Norbert  Wiener  and  his  book  Cybernetics:  Or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine. Then, stemming from Wiener and his brethren in the military- industrial research parks, follow the thread that leads through the rest of the twentieth century by way of systems theory, cellular automata, and chaos theory.8So why not call Deleuze's adversary by its true name? Like Laruelle, 
the real enemy is cybernetics in particular and digitality in general. The Deleuze of "#+- was in(uenced by cybernetics and  all  manner of ecological and topological thinking. By "##, much had changed.To  describe  Deleuze's  "Postscript"  as  a  manifesto  is  to  invoke  the  
question of philosophical genre. An author may adopt di)erent textual strategies to achieve di)erent ends. The interview, the seminar, the essay, 
the  book,  these  all  demand  di)erent  things  from the  philosopher  and command  di)erent  participation  by  the  reader.  Of  course,  the  "Postscript" is no user's manual on how to live. It is no call to action, no intro-duction to the non- fascist life, as Foucault said of Anti- Oedipus. Yet the 

"Postscript" furnishes the basic requirements of a manifesto, an enumer-ation of grievances and a sermon for how to remedy them.

The  question  of  philosophical  genre  can  also  be  approached  from another point of view. For is this not a less philosophical Deleuze? The 
"Postscript" reveals a slightly more casual theorist. It reveals a man more willing  to  comment  about  the  current  state  of  the  world  and  its  daily 
goings- on. Here is a thinker who is willing to make a hard and fast his-torical periodization. Foucault's in(uence is dramatic. Indeed the "Postscript" presents the kind of thinking more often seen in the writings of sociologists, political economists, or even certain kinds of historians-- 
modes  of  writing  none  of  which  are  classic  Deleuze.  He  is  expanding  his normal repertoire to include a very clear argument about historical 
periodization.The  argument is  no secret: at some point during the middle to  late 
twentieth  century,  disciplinary  societies,  characterized  by  con!nement and bureaucratic hierarchy, gave way to control societies, characterized 
by "free- (oating" cybernetic organization.

    99 26/08/2014   5:06:14 PM

:;;  Computers

Make no mistake, the stakes of the "Postscript" are larger than what might be evident at first glance. In order to accept the concept of the control society, one must come to terms with a whole host of related con-cepts  that,  although  not  necessarily  synonymous  with  control  society, 
are nevertheless similar enough to demonstrate the success of the peri-odization of the contemporary as such. In other words, to accept control 
society  one  must  accept  Jean- Franc,ois  Lyotard's  "postmodern,"  Hardt and Negri's "empire," Manuel Castells's "information age," Luc Boltanski 
and E`ve Chiapello's "new spirit of capitalism," and all the other related periodization concepts.

These various historical labels do not mean the same thing, to be sure, and they do not refer  precisely to the same historical periods. But the 
ubiquity of such periodization is evidence that something else is happen-ing.  The  ubiquity  of  periodization  proves  there  exists  a  strong  desire  
to theorize the past few decades as dramatically di)erent from the high water mark of modernity. But further, it suggests that periodization itself 
is something that ought to be done. People are free to squabble over this or that de!nition; nevertheless the "Postscript" demonstrates that periodization is something that de!nes today's mode of being, whether or not people can agree on the historical periods themselves or what they 
might mean.Deleuze evokes many specific things in the "Postscript" that are notable,  a  few  of  which  may  be  itemized  brie(y  before  expanding  on  one particular salient detail. A series of memorable images jump out to the 
reader:  "the  ultrarapid  forms  of  apparently  free- (oating  control"  (les formes ultra- rapides de contro^le a` l'air libre) ("+%); the sieve "whose mesh 
varies from one point to another" ("+#); big business described as "a soul, a gas" ("+#); the fact that "sur!ng has taken over from all the old sports" 
("%,); "the passive danger of entropy and the active danger of sabotage" ("%,);  the  "mushrooming  shantytowns  and  ghettos"  ("%");  and  the 
dynamic between the "mole's burrow" and the "snake's coils" ("%-).9 Like-wise the "Postscript" is one of the few places where Deleuze mentions his 

intriguing concept of the "dividual," a new kind of subject that emerges after the death of the individual.

But the crux of the "Postscript" is something else entirely. The crux of this short text has to do with technology. Here is one of those rare moments 

    100 26/08/2014   5:06:14 PM

  Computers  :;:
in which Deleuze comments on actually existing contemporary technol-ogy, specifically computers. Control societies, he writes, "function with a 
third generation of machines, with information technology and comput-ers" ("%,). Admittedly Deleuze does not delve too deeply into the specificities of computing. But he does say a few brief words about the pairing that most interests us here, the analog and the digital.

Not  as  broadly  integrated  into  Deleuze's  overall  project  as,  say,  the concept of the virtual, the analog and the digital still !gure importantly 
in the  essay. Consider first the relevant sentences, which Deleuze uses  to launch section - of the essay under the heading "Logic" (Logique, a 
cognate with the French word for software, logiciel):10

The various placements or sites of con!nement through which individuals 
pass are independent variables: we're supposed to start over each time at 
zero, and although all these sites have a common language, it's analogical. 
The di)erent forms of control, on the other hand, are inseparable variations,  forming  a  system  of  varying  geometry  whose  language  is  digital 
(though not necessarily binary). ("+%, translation modi!ed)

Only  a  passing  reference,  it  is  true,  but  still  an  important  return  to  two  terms  that had appeared in  Deleuze's  philosophy for several  years 
already.By way of background, consider a text from his aesthetic period, the 
slim  and  elegant  Francis  Bacon:  The  Logic  of  Sensation,  which  first appeared in "#%".

11 The book on Francis Bacon is of course not about the 

digital, nor is it about control society per se. Nevertheless Deleuze !nds time in the monograph to pause for a moment and o)er a few remarks 

on the digital and the analog.12Deleuze's first instinct is to connect the digital to the universe of computation and code. "Digital synthesizers," he writes-- qualifying them as audio synthesizers, but his observations may be extrapolated to include 
video  synthesizers  as  well-- ". . .  are  `integral':  their  operation  passes through a codi!cation,  through a homogenization  and binarization  of 
the data."13 The "integral," integration, these are important concepts in Deleuze's work. Drawing on the use of the term in both mathematics and 
Freudian psychoanalysis, Deleuze uses integration to mean the actuali-zation of the virtual.

    101 26/08/2014   5:06:14 PM

:;!  Computers

"Four terms are synonymous," he wrote a decade earlier in Di#erence and  Repetition,  "actualise,  di)erenciate,  integrate  and  solve."

14  To  integrate a mathematical function means to !nd the "area under the curve." For example one might integrate from a to b on the function f(x), meaning that, given the curve plotted of the function f(x), one sums the area under the curve bounded by x = a to x = b. At the same time, the appeal 
for Deleuze is, I suspect, not so much the mathematical sources of the term  integration  but  the  curvilinear  sources,  shall  we  say  the  baroque 
sources. Curves are complex. Given the complexity of a curve, to "solve" a  curve  mathematically  is  something  of  a  miracle.  In  fact  such  a  feat 
eluded the ancients; it took the baroque mathematicians G. W. Leibniz and Isaac Newton to do it.

As readers of Deleuze will already know, his ontology is one that posits an in!nite plane of heterogenous elements, and on this plane the heterogenous elements come to integrate themselves into more or less homog-enous regularities of aggregation, comportment, and association (Figure 
0).  Hence integration  is  a synonym  for  coordination or organization in Deleuze.  Integration  is  the  miracle  of  givenness  and  the  subsequent 
management of those given beings. Integration produces things like spe-cies, compositions, and societies. And, lest we forget, the countervailing 
force exists as well, homogenous regularities that "deterritorialize" into the virtual, thereby suspending their specificity in favor of adjacent "possibility spaces."In the previously cited quotation from Francis Bacon, Deleuze more 
or less equates !ve terms: digitization, integration, codi!cation, homoge-nization,  and  binarization.  Binarization,  the  grouping  of  things  into 
twos,  is  the  same  as  digitization,  the  separating  or  making  distinct  of atoms, is the same as integration, the solving of complex function curves, 
is  the  same  as  codi!cation,  the  representation  within  a  symbolic  sys- tem, is the same as homogenization, the making uniform of dissimilar 
ingredients.Needless to say the comparison of these  !ve terms raises a number  
of  questions,  not  all  of  which  are  resolvable  here.  What  is  important,  for  Deleuze  and  for  us,  is  that  the  digital  is  a  transformative  process 
(which  is  to  say  "additive,"  or  in  Kantian  vocabulary  "synthetic")  in which a universe grounded in the univocity of an identity of the same 
becomes a universe grounded in discrete distinctions between elements, 

    102 26/08/2014   5:06:14 PM

  Computers  :;3
elements that,  although divided,  are brought together  and held in  rela- tion, suspended opposite each other like cli)s over the banks of a great 
river.In the very same passage from Francis Bacon, Deleuze also says a few 

words,  precious  few,  about  the  analogical.  Not  so  much  a  question  of code, the analogical is a question of diagram or motif. What this means 
is that the analogical operates in the realms of shape and relation, refrains and styles, not symbol or language in the classical sense. Or if a language, 
one lacking in the typical elements of alphabet, letter, and word: "Ana-logical  language  would  be  a  language  of  relations,  which  consists  of 
expressive movements, paralinguistic signs, breaths and screams. . . ."15 The  analogical  is  a  "language,"  then,  but  a  language  of  breaths  and 
screams, a non- language of phatic commands that enacts expression by virtue of the frisson struck between gestures of di)erent types.

"Analogical synthesizers are `modular,'" Deleuze continued, contrasting them  with  digital  synthesizers.  "They  establish  an  immediate  connection between heterogenous elements."16 So although digital synthesizers are integral, slicing up the world into masses of homogenous code atoms, 
analogical  synthesizers  work  through  modularity.  What  this  means  is that di)erent elements, remaining relatively whole and heterogenous to 
one another, are nevertheless able to interoperate immediately. They can touch each other directly, despite their di)erences. (One can begin to see 
why the !elds of post- structuralism, deconstruction, hermeneutics, and semiotics are so inherently digital; as a rule they prohibit immediacy.)

Whereas the digital requires and enlists an underlying homogeneity, the analogical requires an underlying heterogeneity. In the analog paradigm, the stu) of the world remains unaligned, idiosyncratic, singular. These modules are not modules in the sense of standardized, recombinable parts, like modular housing that relies on prefabricated, repeatable materials.  Rather,  as  modules  they  remain  messy  globs  of  dissimilar 
things. They only happen to interoperate because they have managed, by virtue of what Deleuze would call "mutual deterritorialization," to grow 
the necessary sockets that !t into each other.Deleuze's  famous  example  is  the  wasp  and  the  orchid,  two  crea- 
tures, alike in almost no sense, that nevertheless couple up analogically. Although they are two, at the point of coupling the wasp and the orchid 
merge into one.

    103 26/08/2014   5:06:14 PM

:;4  Computers

Let  us  return  brie(y  to  the  mathematical  theme.  Although  Deleuze does not say it explicitly, neither in the "Postscript" nor in the book on 
Francis Bacon and painting, it is possible to infer that the digital means integration and the analogical means di)erentiation. Thus, while integration means area under a curve, di)erentiation or "taking the deriva-tive" means instantaneous slope of the tangent line. Instead of summing 
the area under the curve de!ned by f(x), one extrapolates a secondary function derived from the first function, a secondary function consisting 
of a straight line tangential to any position x = a on the curve. The logic is slightly counterintuitive; do not be fooled by the curves of integration, 
for it is still a question of solving via a multiplicity of regular slices, and hence it is digital. Likewise, do not be fooled by the semantic similarity 
between  the  words  di#erentiation  and  di#erence.  Di)erentiation  is  an analogical event because it brings together the immediacy of two modular and heterogenous spaces: (") the space of the function curve and (-) the adjacent virtual space of all the tangent lines that can be derived from 
the curve.Heterogeneity  has  long  been  an  attractive  theoretical  category,  for 
Deleuze but also for twentieth- century continental philosophy and Anglo American cultural theory in general. And as we have just seen, the analog brings together heterogenous elements into identity (an identity that, again, has nothing to do with homogeneity). There is a strong case to  
be  made  that  Deleuze  was  and  remained  a  philosopher  of  the  analog paradigm alone, and that the paradigm of the digital was only vaguely 
sketched out by him during his lifetime, except in its most visible form, metaphysics. The reasons for this are complex, because they concern the 
history of philosophy and Deleuze's antagonistic relationship toward it, but as a kind of shorthand we might posit the following: those who work 
in  the  tradition  of  metaphysics  will  tend  to  o)er  a  digital  philosophy; those who work in the tradition of immanence, as Deleuze did, will tend 
to o)er an analog philosophy. Indeed in many ways Deleuze is the ana-logical  philosopher  par  excellence.  Just  as  he  described  painting,  "the 
analogical art par excellence."17

The aim of this brief excursion into Deleuze's theory of digitality is to show that the late Deleuze contains an original set of arguments about society 
and politics at the turn of the new millennium. Deleuze understood the 

    104 26/08/2014   5:06:14 PM

  Computers  :;5
world in "#$%-- the anabasis of desire, a)ective revolution, new schizo-phrenic subjects, molecular organization, dispersive and rhizomatic structures, spatiality and topology instead of history, Leibniz instead of Hegel, Riemann instead of Einstein-- but the question remains whether he understood the world at the dawn of the new millennium. (This question has not  been  adequately  explored  thus  far, although  the  work  of  someone 
like Bernard Stiegler is a notable exception.)Much has been said about Foucault's late turn to millennial politics, 
via his concepts of biopower and biopolitics, or Giorgio Agamben's theo-rization  of  today's  state  power,  but  too  little  credit  has  been  given  to 
Deleuze as a forecaster of the future world system. Part of the problem is that, barring the "Postscript" itself, there is no single book or text that 
stands out as a ready exemplar for Deleuze's analysis of millennial capi-talism, as Anti- Oedipus and A Thousand Plateaus provided a vision of 
middle twentieth- century capitalism.Such  an  exemplar  needs  to  be  reconstructed  from  fragments.  Four 
texts form the backbone of his analysis: the two pieces from "##, bun-dled in Negotiations, "Postscript on Control Societies" and the interview 
with Negri titled "Control and Becoming"; paragraphs from an odd little piece called "Having an Idea in Cinema"; and three or four pages from 
Deleuze's "#%$ book Foucault.18Some of the relevant sections from the "Postscript" have already been 
outlined, so consider now the ending of the Negri interview, in which Deleuze's phrasing overlaps greatly with the text of the "Postscript." The 
penultimate question and answer are the most relevant:

[Foucault] was actually one of the first to say that we're moving away from 
disciplinary societies, we've already left them behind. We're moving toward 
control societies that no longer operate by con!ning people but through 
continuous  control  and  instant  communication. . . .  Compared with  the 
approaching forms of ceaseless control in open sites, we may come to see 
the harshest con!nement as part of a wonderful happy past. The quest for 
"universals of communication" ought to make us shudder. . . . Computer 
piracy  and  viruses,  for  example,  will replace  strikes  and  what the  nineteenth century called "sabotage" ("clogging" the machinery). . . . The key 
thing may be to create vacuoles of noncommunication, circuit breakers,  
so we can elude control.19

    105 26/08/2014   5:06:14 PM

:;6  Computers

Add now the passages from "Having an Idea in Cinema," a text that derives from a lecture titled "Qu'est- ce que l'acte de cre'ation?" given by 
Deleuze  at La Fe'mis (Fondation europe'enne  des me'tiers de l'image  et  du  son)  on  May  "+,  "#%+,  but  published  in  "##,  the  same  year  of  the  
"Postscript."  Some  of  the  relevant  passages  simply  duplicate  the  same phrasing and language about Foucault that made it into the "Postscript," 
so they need not be repeated here. But "Having an Idea in Cinema" also includes  an  important,  o)hand  remark  that  adds  another  dimension  
to Deleuze's views on control society: "A control is not a discipline. In making freeways, for example, you don't enclose people but instead multiply the means of control. I am not saying that this is the freeway's exclu-sive  purpose,  but  that  people  can  drive  in!nitely  and  `freely'  without 
being at all con!ned yet while still being perfectly controlled. This is our future."

20

In an alternate transcription of the same lecture Deleuze included a few extemporaneous lines, and even mentions Minitel, the French teletext network that predates the Web. "This can be done completely di)er-ently too," he said about the regrouping of people around arrangements 
of ubiquitous control. "It can be done through Minitel after all. Every-thing that you want-- what's astounding would be the forms of control."

21

Recall  that  the  French  contro^le  carries  stresses  in  meaning  that  are slightly di)erent from the English control. Contro^le means control as in 

the power to in(uence people and things, but it also refers to the actual administration of control via particular monitoring apparatuses such as 
train turnstiles, border crossings, and checkpoints. The notion, in English, of having to pass through "passport control" gets at the deeper meaning 
of the word. So when Deleuze talks about les socie'te's de contro^le he means those kinds of societies, or alternately those localized places within the 
social totality, where mobility is fostered inside certain strictures of motion, where openings appear rather than disappear, where subjects (or for that 
matter objects) are liberated as long as they adhere to a variety of pre-scribed comportments.

In addition to this text and the two in Negotiations, a fourth text ex-pands Deleuze's discussions of computer- based control, exploding them 
into an enigmatic tapestry of prognostications. I refer to those notorious pages #-- #. and "."- .- of Deleuze's late book on Foucault, in which he 
meditates  on  something  called  "life  resistance"  and  a  new  mysterious 

    106 26/08/2014   5:06:14 PM

  Computers  :;7
construct called the "superfold," an alluring designation to which he un-fortunately never returns.

22

Consider the sections in which Deleuze proposes, but does not fully develop, a vision of life as living resistance:

When power . . . takes life as its aim or object, then resistance to power 
already puts itself on the side of life, and turns life against power. . . . Life 
becomes resistance to power when power takes life as its object. . . . When 
power becomes bio- power resistance becomes the power of life, a vital- 
power that cannot be con!ned within species, environment or the paths of 
a particular diagram. . . . Is not life this capacity to resist force?23

Then  later,  in  the  !nal  paragraphs  of  the  book's  appendix,  Deleuze broaches  the  question  of  genetics  and  the  so  called  third- generation 
machines  (that  is,  computers  and  bioinformatics)  that  would  !gure prominently in the "Postscript" four years later. He wonders aloud about 
the "death of man," as it was described in Foucault and Nietzsche: "The question that continually returns is therefore the following: if the forces 
within man compose a form only by entering into a relation with forms from the outside, with what new forms do they now risk entering into a 
relation, and what new form will emerge that is neither God nor Man? This  is  the  correct  place  for  the  problem  which  Nietzsche  called  `the 
superman.'"24 In other words, what is the new con!guration of man after the death of man (or, if you like, the subject after the death of the subject), and what had to happen in order to create such a new condition of life? Deleuze's answer:

Biology had to take a leap into molecular biology, or dispersed life regroup 
in the genetic code. Dispersed work had to regroup in third- generation 
machines,  cybernetics  and  information  technology.  What  would  be  the 
forces in play, with which the forces within man would then enter into a 
relation? It would no longer involve raising to in!nity or finitude but an 
unlimited !nity, thereby evoking every situation of force in which a !nite 
number of components yields a practically unlimited diversity of combinations. It would be neither the fold or the unfold that would constitute 
the active mechanism, but something like the Superfold, as borne out by 
the foldings proper to the chains of the genetic code, and the potential of 

    107 26/08/2014   5:06:14 PM

:;8  Computers

silicon in third- generation machines. . . . The forces within man enter into 
a relation with forces from the outside, those of silicon which supersedes 
carbon, or genetic components which supersede the organism. . . . In each 
case we must study the operations of the superfold, of which the "double 
helix" is the best- known example.25

Scattered across the "Postscript" and these other citations is a new image of society and the self that can not simply be reduced to Deleuze's previous tropes like the body without organs, the rhizome, or even the virtual. Such a new image involves, nay requires, the recognition of the computer 
as  its  central  mitigating  factor.  Just  as  the  fold  was  Deleuze's  diagram  for the modern subject of the baroque period, the superfold is the new 
"active  mechanism"  for  life  within  computerized  control  society.  The dividual and the superfold, in other words, have a special relationship 
with each other."A fold is always folded within a fold, like a cavern in a cavern," wrote 
Deleuze of the ontology depicted in Leibniz, in an e)ort to demonstrate how  Leibniz's  was  not  an  atomism.  "The  unit  of  matter,  the  smallest  
element of the labyrinth, is the fold, not the point which is never a part, but a simple extremity of the line."

26 Although Deleuze does not specify 

things further, one can extrapolate that the superfold, being "proper to the chains of the genetic code" and the progeny of an "unlimited diversity of combinations," would follow a diagrammatic logic of dispersive and distributive relations within networks, of iterative regress via computational recursion.Instead of the human coming into a relationship with itself, as Deleuze 
characterized the baroque, the human comes into a relation with "forces from  the  outside"  such  as  the  silicon  of  the  computer  chip  or  exoge- 
nous factors from genetic engineering. The dividual therefore does not so much carry pleats in its soul, as Deleuze said of the baroque subject, 
but  a  tessellated,  recombinant  soul-- if  soul  is  still  the  proper  word-- forming and reforming across the metastable skein of the bioinformatic 

ecosystem.Yet  Deleuze's  argument  is  not  an  exotic  one.  In  France,  !gures  like 
Andre'  Leroi- Gourhan  and  Bertrand  Gille  had  already  demonstrated how  human  beings  coevolve  with  their  exogenous  technologies  and 

    108 26/08/2014   5:06:14 PM

  Computers  :;9
techniques.  And  in  North  America  !gures  like  Lewis  Mumford  and Marshall McLuhan had made similar claims. (Indeed the !nal paragraph 
of Deleuze's Foucault reads very much like Donna Haraway's now famous "Cyborg  Manifesto,"  which  while  predating  the  book  by  one  year  was 
likely  unknown  to  Deleuze  at the  time.) Instead  what might be  exotic about Deleuze's argument, or at least what makes it novel, is his mobilization of the concept in terms of a diagram. He describes it as a "super" fold, a double helix, a fractal topography, not simply a folded one.

27

But the ultimate lesson to be learned from the "Postscript" is not so much a lesson about the subject or society. The ultimate lesson is one 

about periodization. For what Deleuze wishes to do in the essay, follow-ing Lyotard, Foucault, and all the rest, is to assert the historical break. He 
wants  to  show  how  everything  has  changed,  indeed  that  the  world  of "##, has changed so dramatically from the "#+- world as to be practically 
indistinguishable. "The key thing," he says, "is that we're at the beginning of something new" ("%-).

It is not particularly important whether one agrees or disagrees with the Deleuzian- Foucauldian tripartite periodization from sovereign society through disciplinary society and then to control society. The peri-odization itself is the important thing. And how deliciously ironic that  
in recent years periodization seems to be appearing with increased fre-quency, an increased periodicity of periodization. Indeed all this talk of 
the superfold is, by that very same measure, a kind of superperiodiza- tion without end. Each new fold is a new historical break. First the fold, 
then the double fold, the triple, on up to the multiplicative folds of the superfold.

Thus  the  task  of  historical  thinking  itself  is  implicated  in  Deleuze's "Postscript" and as such has metastasized and reduplicated into a super 
state of recursive channels. The ultimate signi!cance of control society  is not so much the continuous encroachment of the border checkpoint 
or the passport control, not so much data mining or facial recognition algorithms, but that it has eviscerated history, not by banning dissent but 
by  accelerating  the  opportunities  and  channels  for  critical  thought  to in!nity and therefore making it impossible to think historically in the 
first place. Thus the central challenge within control society will be not simply  to  resist  the  various  new  nefarious  control  apparatuses,  but  to 
rescue history from its own consummation.

    109 26/08/2014   5:06:15 PM

::;  Computers
Thesis  IX.  Being  is  a  computational  mode;  it  is  coterminous  with  the computational decision. So which is it in the end, ubiquitous desire or 
ubiquitous control? The Deleuze of "#+- or the Deleuze of "##,?Laruelle's response is to deny both while rea*rming their non- standard 

core. The point is not so much to select one Deleuze over the other but instead to radicalize Deleuze and subject him to the generic finitude of 
the one. Only by universalizing and unilateralizing history can we pass from Deleuze's philosophy of control to what Laruelle calls arti!cial or 
"!ction" philosophy. Only by thinking history as the generic totality can we see control in terms of determination or destiny.

Chapter / discussed how an event is also a decision, how being is also digital. Being is posterior to the event of appropriation (Heidegger) that 
actualizes  it,  and  as  such  is  an  evental  mode.  In  its  baseline  digitality being also provides the conditions for the transcendental. We have seen 
that the transcendental can be minimized or otherwise overcome in the subtractive mode of generic being or the accumulative mode of continuous  being, or  it can  be  accentuated  and  fostered  in  the  contradictory- negational mode of dialectical being or the a*rmative mode of di)erential being.Now it is time to take the principle of sufficient reason very literally.  
A  common  but  unfortunate  way  of  understanding  the  principle  is  to turn it into an explanatory narrative for how things were made or where 
they came from. "For any entity, there is a narrative that will explain why it exists and why it exists in this manner."

Such an interpretation confuses the principle of sufficient reason and limits its utility. It reduces facticity to causality. It reduces givenness to a 
lurid narrative of origins. It shackles appearance to logic.To avoid such an interpretation, the principle should be taken literally, 
that  is,  in  terms  of  the  co- presence  of  being  and  thought.  "No  actual entity, then no reason" (Whitehead). Being in the world requires thought 
in the world. Being- given requires thought- given. An entity requires a reason. To be with means to think with. Thus to follow the path of being 
also means to follow the path of co- thought, or com- putation.To combine the event and the transcendental is to produce computation. Recall the de!nition of Turing's universal machine: it is a machine that  can  perform  the  work  of  any  other  machine,  provided  it  can  be 
described logically. Or to rephrase using the vocabulary employed thus 

    110 26/08/2014   5:06:15 PM

  Computers  :::
far: the computer is a machine that can actuate events, provided they are formulated in terms of the transcendental.

Given that being is both evental and transcendental, it is no surprise that computation takes place within being. In fact, it is inevitable; it is 
visible across the most diverse instances, RNA as computational strands, markets  as  societies  of computation,  stomachs  as  processors  for foodstu)s, or what have you.It is now possible to revisit the !nal paragraphs of the introduction 
and  (esh out a related set of concepts, the  computational  decision and  the principle of su"cient computation.

28 The principle states that, within 

the standard model, anything co- thinkable is also computable. The mere existence  of  something  is  sufficient  grounds  for  its  being  computable 

(co- thinkable). The computational decision is the event that inaugurates such a distinction.

But it goes further as well, because presence itself is subject to a com-putational condition. Computation is not an "option" available to presence but a precondition of it. It is not simply that computers, arti!cial intelligence, virtual reality, and the like are predicated on computational 
decisionism. It is not simply that such and such mundane detail will be rendered computationally, that weather patterns  will  be  modeled  on  a 
supercomputer,  that  stock  markets  will  be  migrated  over  to  electronic trading, that we will "go digital." These are all common, pragmatic repercussions of a much more pervasive computational decision that perme-ates the standard model from end to end. The advent of digital being-- 
which is to say the only sort of being directly available to us-- shows that presence itself is a computational condition.

A  !nal  step  awaits,  for  Laruelle  takes  the  computational  decision  as  raw  material  and  through  it  discovers  an  alternate  mode  of  non- 
computation or non- computer, just as he has done with non- photography, or indeed  with non- philosophy  as  a  whole.  He  considers  the  "computational posture" and software execution as an instance of identity and cloning. He considers computation in terms of an auto- execution, or an 
auto- processing.Ultimately Laruelle arrives at a purely immanent conception of computation (as co- thinking). This is a form of computation entirely subtracted from any kind of conscious will or causality, from any kind of metaphysical representation or manifestation, from the typical distinction between 

    111 26/08/2014   5:06:15 PM

::!  Computers
hardware and software, from the classic debate in Arti!cial Intelligence about whether or not computers can think like humans.

It's  always  so  predictable  and  wearisome  this  back  and  forth  debate 
between  the  proponents  of  Arti!cial  Intelligence  and  those  advocating 
Conscious. . . . We could say that non- philosophy is an attempt to give a 
(non- Kantian) solution to this con(ict, to show a "way out" of it, or more 
precisely to demonstrate exactly how and under what conditions thought 
would never need to enter it.29

Such  a  purely  immanent  conception  of  computation  would  appear therefore, axiomatically and primordially, as process. Non- computation 
is  simply  the  condition  of  the  event  that  is  in- process,  that  operates "according to" process.

    112 26/08/2014   5:06:15 PM

!"#$%&'()%#*+)*+#,*'--.%-)/+%0-'*1%
s i x
Capitalism

Don't look at Part I, put it aside. Or so goes Althusser's warning to first- time readers of Marx's Capital. It is important to skip Part I of the treatise, 
Althusser advised, at least on  the  first couple of reads.  Only when the truth of Capital is fully internalized, its scientific intervention into the 
"new continent" of history, one may "begin to read Part I (Commodi- ties  and  Money)  with  in!nite  caution,  knowing  that  it  will  always  be 
extremely di*cult to understand, even after several readings of the other Parts, without the help of a certain number of deeper explanations."

1

After all, Althusser argued, the same political division between social classes was mirrored within the text as an epistemological division. Part 

I contains something close to philosophical idealism, followed by the sci-enti!c materialism of the rest of the book. Althusser's advice was thus 
both  practical  and  political:  Part  I is  not  only  di*cult  reading  for  the young  and  the  uninitiated-- Althusser  admitted  that  members  of  the 
proletariat would have no problem reading the book because their "class instinct"  was  already  attuned  to  the  quotidian  experience  of  capitalist 
exploitation-- it also risks derailing the reader into dangerously Hegelian and philosophical diversions. "This advice is more than advice," he whispered. It is "an imperative."2Did he know it? Did Althusser see the  colossus issuing forth in the 
wake of such advice, advice written in March "#$# at such a profound historical conjuncture in France and indeed the world? Was he aware that 
this would solidify the agenda for the next few decades of Marxian or otherwise progressive philosophy and theory? The colossus of exchange.

::5

    115 26/08/2014   5:06:15 PM

::6  Capitalism

By focusing on surplus- value instead of, say, the commodity, by insist-ing that Capital and Capital alone be the text by which Marx is judged, 
therefore sidelining the crypto- Hegelian "young Marx" of species- being and alienation, Althusser placed the emphasis squarely on the scientific 
structures  of  exchange:  the  spheres  of  production  and  circulation,  the factory (oor and the marketplace, the passage from small- scale industry 
to imperialism. Such an emphasis would continue to dominate theory for decades, both in France and through the adoption of French theory 
in  the  English- speaking  world.  Stemming from  his  reinterpretation  in the "#$,s and '+,s, Marx would be rethought primarily as a theorist of 
exchange. Mating Marx with Freud, theorists like Jean- Joseph Goux would begin to speak in terms of "symbolic economies" evident across all spheres 
of life, whether psychoanalytic, numismatic, or semiotic. Indeed, life would be understood exclusively in terms of relations of exchange.

Even deviations from capitalist exchange, as in the many meditations on "the gift," or even, in a very di)erent way, Deleuze and Guattari's writings  on  desiring  machines,  would  conserve  exchange  as  the  ultimate medium of relation. The gift economies of the Haida or Salish potlatch 
might not be capitalist, but they remain economies nonetheless. Desir-ing machines might !nd fuel for their aleatory vectors from beyond the 
factory walls, but they remain beholden to the swapping of energies, the pathways of (ight lines, and the interrelation of forces of intensi!cation 
and dissipation.Althusser  had  merely  identi!ed  a  general  paradigm,  that  systems  of 
relation exist, and that they are prime constituting factors for all the other elements of the world, from objects to societies. As a general philosophical 
paradigm  it  would  thus  forge  common  currency  with  other  existing schools, chief among them phenomenology, which must assent to a fundamental relation between self and world, or even the tradition of meta-physics in general, which assumes a baseline expressive model from Being 
to being, from essence to instance, or from God to man. For Marxists, the fundamental relation is always one of antagonism, hierarchy, inequality, 
or predation (see Hugo Gellert, "Cat and Mouse," the frontispiece of this chapter).

All of this is contained in what Fredric Jameson has called the second fundamental  riddle  in  Capital,  the  riddle  contained  in  the  equation 
M-- M' (from money to "money prime" or money with a surplus added). Such is the riddle of exchange: How does money of one value transform 

    116 26/08/2014   5:06:15 PM

  Capitalism  ::7
into  money  of  a  greater  value?  To  answer  the  question,  Marx  had  to "descend into the hidden abode of production," revealing the intricacies 
of the labor process and the working day, in order ultimately to show the origins of surplus value, what Althusser (and indeed Marx himself) considered the "illuminating heart" of Capital.But  exchange  is  still  just  the  second  riddle  in  Marx.  Capital  is  propelled by another riddle, one that !nds its voice in the elusive Part I, the part  that  Althusser  warned  his  readers  to  avoid.  "The  mystery  of  an 
equivalence between two radically di)erent qualitative things"-- this is the first riddle, according to Jameson. "How can one object be the equivalent of another one?"3 In other words, the riddle is the riddle of A = B. The real things constituting A and B themselves, as, for example, twenty 
yards of linen (as A) and one coat (as B), contribute nothing to the rid-dle. Rather the mystery derives from the unexplainable, and indeed violent, possibility of inserting an equals sign between di)erent things. The riddle is the riddle of the equation; the violence of capital is the violence 
of the equality of inequality. Or as Jameson puts it, "It seems possible to read all of Part One [of Capital] as an immense critique of the equation 
as such."4
Thesis X. The multidecade legacy of Althusser, who put the !nal period at the end of the sentence of exchange, has come to an end with Laruelle. 
Everything that has thus far been described under the banner of exchange is not simply a philosophical paradigm for Laruelle, but the philosophical  paradigm.  There  is  no  philosophy  that  is  not  too  a  philosophy  of exchange. There is no metaphysical arrangement that is not too a concourse of convertibility. There is no structure of thought that is not too  a  structure  of  relation.  There  is  no  phenomenology  that  is  not  too  an 
orientation within a world.Against all these things stands Laruelle, not a philosopher but still a 
Marxist, who aims to describe not so  much Marx's "rational kernel in  the mystical shell" but rather something like an immanent kernel itself 
for  Marx  (and  capitalism  too).  Such  a  real  kernel  would  be  devoid  of  all rationality, all shells, all mysti!cations, and all chance to interrelate 
kernels and shells in the first place.5Such is the irony of Laruelle. He deploys Althusserian Marxist language 
("determination- in- the- last- instance"  [DLI]),  he  deploys  Althusserian Marxist methodology (that science should deviate from philosophy and 

    117 26/08/2014   5:06:15 PM

::8  Capitalism
exist "in" or "on" it), yet nevertheless he rejects, in spirit at least, much of what comes after Part I of Capital and indeed much of the very pillars  
of Marxism itself.6 Although, as I hope to show, these pillars are pillars of Capital  and  thus  subtend  the  structure  of  capitalism,  not the  Marxian 
critique levied against it or even perhaps Marx himself. Thus, in Laruelle's profound deviation from the Marxian tradition, he ironically remains a 
Marxist, and in so doing produces one of the most profound critiques of capitalism hitherto known.

My proposal here is therefore a simple one, that we must understand Laruelle as both a post- Althusserian Marxist and as someone who brashly 
ignores Althusser's advice. In the end Laruelle produces an unexpected version of Marx, unexpected not because it supplements Marx in new 
ways  or  propels  Marx  into  the  future-- endeavors  impugned  by  non- philosophy-- but because Laruelle ends up endorsing all the old dunderheaded  ideas,  long  ago  purged  from  so- called  serious  Marxist  theory: vulgar determinism, the qualitative purity of use- value, and the irrelevance of ideology and "epistemological breaks."Published in -,,,, after the collapse of the Soviet Union and the failure of many actually existing Marxist states, Laruelle's book Introduction to Non- Marxism is one of the more provocative entries in the decades- 
long discourses of Marxist theory and constitutes Laruelle's most extended engagement  with  Marx,  although  not  necessarily  with  the  political  as 
such.7 True to form, Laruelle refuses to report whether Marxism did or did not fail. He refuses to try to amend or deconstruct Marxism in any 
way, as that would simply constitute further philosophy.8 Instead he seeks to "philosophically impoverish" Marxism, with the goal of "universalizing" 
it through a "scientific mode of universalization."9 (Was not Althusser's project, thirty years prior, nearly the same?)

Although Laruelle does not often a)ect an overtly anticapitalist stance in his work, I want to show here that Laruelle's ontology, if not so much 
his political theory, provides a foundation for one of the most aggres-sively  anticapitalist  critiques  since  Marx  himself,  since  the  Frankfurt 
School, and since the "scientific Marxism" of Althusser and post- World War II France or the autonomist movements in "#+,s Italy.

Laruelle accomplishes this by militantly denying exchange, one of the essential preconditions of any kind of commerce. Unlike Keynesian economists, or Third- Way liberals, Laruelle does not advocate a molli!cation 

    118 26/08/2014   5:06:15 PM

  Capitalism  ::9
of exchange; he does not allow for something like "capitalism with a friendly face." Unlike post- structuralists, Laruelle does not acknowledge a system 
of mutual co- construction between self and other. Instead, Laruelle devel-ops an ontological platform that, while leaving room for certain kinds of 
causality and relation, radically denies exchange in any form whatsoever.Deviating too from so- called process philosophers, who must necessarily endorse exchange at some level, Laruelle advocates a mode of expres-sion that is irreversible. He does this through a number of interconnected 
concepts,  the  most  important  of  which  is  determination- in- the- last- instance. Having kidnapped the term from its Althusserian Marxist origins, Laruelle uses DLI to show how there can exist causality that is not reciprocal, how "relation" can exist that is not at the same time a "relation 
of exchange," indeed  how a  universe  might  look  if it were  not already forged implicitly from the mold of a market economy.

Herein lies Laruelle's rigorous anticapitalism, an anticapitalism rooted not in the critique of social relations at the level of politics, but in the 
prohibition of exchange at the level of ontology.10
In order to demonstrate this aspect of Laruelle's thinking, consider four interlocking  concepts  and  claims:  science,  the  infrastructure,  the  irreversibility of expression, and incommensurability.The  first  topic,  science,  is  central  to  Laruelle's  conception  of  non- 
philosophy as a whole, and central too for Althusser, who viewed science as the only proper response to philosophy. For Althusser, science often 
bears the moniker of practical philosophy, Marxist philosophy, or indeed simply Marxist science. For Laruelle, science is synonymous with non- 
philosophy. Or, to be more correct, "primary" science, what he also calls "uni!ed theory," would unify and subtend the common philosophies and 
the common sciences of the world.11 As Laruelle puts it, non- philosophical science would be "primary" vis- a`- vis science and philosophy, but would 
also carry a "primacy- without- priority" and thus not issue forth or syn-thesize  itself  through  science  and  philosophy,  in  an  attempt  to  act  as 
their guiding spirit. One must disperse the various encyclopedias of sci-enti!c and philosophical knowledge into "a chaos of identities" in order 
to unify such knowledge into a "democracy" of thought, not by virtue of a common set of axioms or dogmatic truths but by virtue of the generic 
identity of uni!ed thinking.

    119 26/08/2014   5:06:15 PM

:!;  Capitalism

So perhaps Marx's eleventh thesis on Feuerbach, which Althusser held up as the most emblematic moment of Marx's intervention into philosophy, is also a !ne description for Laruelle's project. The eleventh thesis on Feuerbach, Marx's famous maxim that philosophers ought to change 
the world, not simply interpret it, indicates, in the most general sense, that  the  correct  response  to  interpretation  (philosophy)  is  not  more 
interpretation (not more philosophy).In other words, the correct response, if one follows Althusser's gloss of 
Marx, is to replace philosophical interpretation with a new kind of sci-ence, a Marxian science. Such is the elemental discovery of Marx, a discovery that Althusser suggests was best revealed after the fact by way of Lenin's Materialism and Empirio- criticism. But is this not also Laruelle's 
most essential claim, that the best response to philosophy is not more philosophy? That the best response to philosophy is to cease doing it?  
Is it not possible to telescope all Laruelle within Marx's eleventh thesis on  Feuerbach?  Philosophers  have  hitherto  only  interpreted  the  world  in 
various ways; the point is to articulate a rigorous and immanently scien-ti!c non- philosophy of it.

Like Althusser, Laruelle shuns the lingering abstractions that perme-ate  Marx,  particularly  the  young  Marx.  Yet  Laruelle  reminds  us  that 
"Marxism remains abstract through a lack of universality, a lack of real-ity, of radicality, not through being poorly adapted to the various avatars 
of societies and the  becomings  of history. It is  not made abstract by a  bad philosophy that would remove it from history, but by an excess of 
philosophy that plunges it into history."12 The problem is thus not a bad philosophy-- in this case the bad Hegel, a philosophy pleading to be corrected or "put back on its feet"-- but an excess of philosophy.All this prompts Laruelle to unify philosophy and capitalism together 

as a single term, "Thought- World." Just as philosophy follows a principle of sufficient philosophy, Laruelle writes that capitalism marches to the 
same tune, via a principle of sufficient economy. The principle of su*-cient economy means that anything whatsoever is available for reproduction and exchange, that capitalism is sufficient to "englobe," in Laruelle's language, the entire world.

So the principle of sufficient economy is a "universal capitalism," not simply  the  imperialist  extension  of  capitalism  into  all  corners  of  the 
globe, but a perversion of both thinking and being that renders all !xity 

    120 26/08/2014   5:06:15 PM

  Capitalism  :!:
as permeable and reversible exchange.13 As Laruelle puts it, even capital-ism is incontinent to itself: "The essence of capitalism is and/or is not, in 
a  way  that  is  ultimately  reversible,  capital."14  This  is  the  key  to  under-standing today's trend toward mondialisation (literally "world- ization," 
but typically translated as "globalization"). Only by fusing together phi-losophy, as principle of sufficient philosophy, and capitalism, as principle 
of  sufficient  economy,  is  it  possible  to  see  a  single  object  or  a  process  of "englobing." Laruelle means this in quite direct terms: the worlds that 
populate  phenomenology  are  a  question  of  "globalization"  as  the  self englobes its world via orientation and solicitation of attention; but so too 
the world, or globe, of capitalist globalization is quite literally the planet itself, the ultimate terrain of the real.

This is why Laruelle is so quick to make philosophy and capitalism coterminous;  the  two  are,  quite  simply,  the  same  thing  for  him.  Both 
philosophy and capitalism subject the world to the intercourse of revers-ibility and exchange, both express things in terms of their opposites, and 
both  destroy  (or  at  least  ignore  to  their  own  detriment)  the  ultimate immanence of nature, which for Laruelle is the one and for Marx the real 
base. So just as science was Marx's response to capitalism, so too science is Laruelle's response to philosophy.

On this last point Althusser would not disagree, because in his esti-mation  Marx's  indictment  of  capitalism  was  always  already  an  indictment of philosophy. The di)erence lies more in the composition of the indictment. Laruelle's indictment is on the grounds of a venomous reversible convertibility. Althusser's indictment is on the ground of an odious bourgeois idealism.

This brings us to the second question, that of infrastructure. Laruelle !nds  inspiration  not  simply  in  Marx's  intuitive  understanding  of  the 
relation between science and philosophy, but also in what Laruelle views as the immovable, transhistorical, and, yes, fully immanent material base. 
Matter  or  materialism  is  not  simply  the  topic  of  Marxism,  nor  either simply its conceptual core. Matter is quite literally the material of Marxism. In other words, Marxism is matter itself; dialects breaks bricks (or so it seems).

What  Laruelle  means  by  this  is  that  Marxism  alone  posits  a  pure imma nent material base, one that is determinate, immovable, and immanent  to  itself  unsupplemented  by  any  idealist  sca)old.  As  he  puts  it,  

    121 26/08/2014   5:06:15 PM

:!!  Capitalism
non- Marxism's goal is "to universalize matter in an immanent way, with-out  pretending  to  amend  or  correct  it  with  any  kind  of  philosophy."

15  

In this respect the mere existence of Marxism is evidence of an irresist-ible one, the material base. This is why Marxism is a politics (and not 

simply  an  "interpretation"),  because  it  saddles  itself  over  the  vector  of determinacy  constructed  between  infrastructure  and  superstructure, 
this vector being nothing but the determinacy of the one itself. In short, Marxism does not simply describe a relation (between worker and boss 
or between base and superstructure), it directly embodies this relation and thus, following the Laruellean ontology, must be synonymous with 
real matter itself.The  non- philosophical  term  Laruelle  assigns  to  such  a  situation  is 
"given- without- givenness,"  but  the  Marxian  term  is  "infrastructure."16 The relationship between infrastructure and superstructure, which for 
many subsequent critics betrayed in Marx a pernicious and somewhat nai"ve determinism, is for Laruelle absolutely crucial, even bene!cial. The 
more nai"ve the better; the more determinist the better.In The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, Marx described the 
"material conditions of existence, [or the] two di)erent kinds of prop-erty," that made up the Party of Order, formed from the alliance of two 
factions of the ruling class, the Legitimists, the large land owners who were a legacy of the "%"/- ., Bourbon restoration period, and the Orleanists, the !nanciers and large- scale industrialists who were a legacy of the July Monarchy of "%.,- /%: "Upon the di)erent forms of property, upon 
the social conditions of existence, rises an entire superstructure of dis-tinct and peculiarly formed sentiments, illusions, modes of thought and 
views of life. The entire class creates and forms them out of its material foundations  and  out  of  the  corresponding  social  relations."

17  Later,  in  

an "%0# text that would become a prototype for Capital, the "Preface (to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy)," Marx also addressed 

the superstructure and its "real foundation."

In the social production of their existence, men inevitably enter into de!-
nite relations, which are independent of their will, namely relations of production appropriate to a given stage in the development of their material 
forces of production. The totality of these relations of production constitutes the economic structure of society, the real foundation, on which arises 

    122 26/08/2014   5:06:15 PM

  Capitalism  :!3

a legal and political superstructure and to which correspond de!nite forms 
of social consciousness.18

These passages have been discussed extensively within Marxist discourse, particularly after the Cultural Turn of the mid- twentieth century. Yet the 
use that Laruelle makes of them is unique.His intervention turns on the conceptual shift from "relate" to "arise." 
Laruelle,  who  admittedly  treats  relation  with  scorn  and  skepticism, acknowl edges  the  existence  of  "de!nite  relations"  within  the  material 
base of society. These relations constitute the world and thus the world as it is constructed via capitalism and indeed via philosophy.

Yet  "in"  or  "on"  these  relations  arises  a  secondary  thing,  the  super-structure. It does not matter so much the nature of this superstructure, 
its qualities and a)ordances, or even its ability to reciprocate back in a mutually determining way toward the base (these being some of the concerns of the cultural Marxists). Rather what interests Laruelle is the pure and rigorous radicality of such a unilateral and unidirectional causality.

To underscore the force of this causal determinacy, let us continue the previous Marx quote where it left o), revealing one of the most frequently 
cited passages in Marx's entire body of work: "The mode of production of  material  life  conditions  the  general  process  of  social,  political  and 
intellectual life. It is not the consciousness of men that determines their existence, but their social existence that determines their consciousness."

19

For Laruelle the words conditions and determines are not sources of anxiety,  as  they  were  for  many  of  the  postwar  Marxist  theorists  from 

Althusser to Raymond Williams and beyond. For Laruelle these words are not sources of anxiety but rather must be taken very literally, even 
accentuated and made more rigorous, more radical. The infrastructure of  the  material  base  is  a  given- without- givenness  because  and  only 
because of its ability to condition and determine-- unidirectionally, irre-versibly,  and  "in  the  last  instance"-- whatever  it  might  condition  and 
determine, in this case the superstructure. Thus the infrastructure stands as  "given" while still  never partaking in "givenness," neither as a thing 
having appeared as a result of a previous givenness, nor a present given-ness engendering the o)spring of subsequent givens.

Again,  any  molli!cation  of  Marx's  determinism  would  not  simply miss the point for Laruelle, it would undo the entire Marxist project. If 

    123 26/08/2014   5:06:15 PM

:!4  Capitalism
Marxism has any force at all, it gains such force by virtue of an immanent material  base,  synthetic  to  nothing  but  determinate  in  all.  Not  simply 
labor power or "force  of labor"  but  force of  infrastructure-- the  French term force de travail being so similar to the important Laruellean term 
force (de) pense'e ["force (of) thought"]).20If this brief discussion of infrastructure illuminates anything, it is that 
Laruelle is a vulgar determinist and unapologetically so. So now to the third  theme,  related  closely  to  the  second,  which  is  the  way  in  which 
determinism leads to an irreversibility of expression.In Laruellean language, undeniably infused here with an Althusser- 
ian additive, this irreversibility is known as "determination- in- the- last- instance."  Althusser  focused  on  the  "last  instance"  as  a  way  to  soften 
Marx's determinism, to forge a compromise between the material base and the relative autonomy of the superstructural realm. But for Laruelle 
the "last instance" means precisely the opposite. It is not a bone tossed to the sociocultural sphere, but a trump card slammed down with de!nitive force. "In the last instance" does not mean that the one must pander to the world, including it in all its many deliberations. On the contrary, 
it means that the one remains ultimately "last," oblivious in its position of causal determinacy. DLI, therefore, which Laruelle admits was "invented 
by Marx- Engels for Historical Materialism," describes a specific logic of causality  "which  is  uni- lateral  against  all  the  philosophical  phantasms  

of reciprocity and convertibility."21 The real base is not merely one (ank that can be brought into relation with another (ank, such as the superstructure. The base, as determinate- in- the- last- instance, is a "!nal" cause, not a primary one. Thus, by making DLI the general axiomatic form of 
his "non- ontological causality," Laruelle allows for "a lifting of philosophi-cal suficientcy by way of the theoretical reduction of philosophy to the 
radical immanence of its real base."22Laruelle discusses DLI in a number of places, but in the non- Marxism 

book it is summarized by way of three distinctive traits. First, DLI is a causality that is unique but calls or supposes an other, as if it is the sole 
causality but also somehow insufficient. Hence the one supposes the two (although  without  necessarily  producing  or  metaphysically  expressing 
itself through the two). Next, these secondary causalities, those of the two or the clone, are introduced back into the one during the !nal calculus. 
In other words, the secondary causalities are always already structurally 

    124 26/08/2014   5:06:15 PM

  Capitalism  :!5
"in debt" to the infrastructure. Last, DLI operates in the "!nal instance" as a quasi invariant or constant, "in opposition to the variations of nature 
or region, to the variability of secondary causality."23What this means is that DLI, if it is expressive, is expressive only in 
one direction. It is thus properly labeled irreversible. In the structure of ontological expression, DLI exerts an absolute dominance over the world.

Would it be hyperbolic, then, to speak of Laruelle's determinism as a kind of sadism of the one, and of DLI as a kind of "sado- cause"? Perhaps, 
particularly  given  the  fact  that  sadism  requires  a  circuit  of  exchange- ability between master and slave, between dominant and submissive. Yet 
the  sadism  of  the  one  is  really  more  of  an  obliviousness,  a  neglectful  unidirectionality, in which no return is possible. This is not to slander 
Laruelle's universe as unfeeling, violent, or even proto- fascist, simply to underscore  the  radical  hierarchy  of  force  established  between  the  one 
and its clones. Force (ows one way and one way only in the non- standard encounter. Recall that there is a "force of thought" in Laruelle, but never 
a "force of  reflection" fostering exchange of forces.24Perhaps a useful way to understand Laruelle's notion of the irreversibility of expression is by way of the so- called failure of actually existing Marxism. It does not matter so much which dates are assigned to this 
failure-- "%+" in Paris, "#"# in Berlin, or "##" in the Soviet Union. And it does not matter so much that Marxism be understood as a burrowing 
mole (or striking snake) able to return from periods of suppression to rise up and blossom again in a new form, as someone like Badiou has 
recently described with such elegance.25In fact Laruelle is careful not to reject the failure of Marxism. He considers failure to be an asset of Marxism, not a liability. Laruelle is careful to avoid the "vicious circle" of so many theorists, those who attempt a 
Marxism of Marx, which for Laruelle would be just as philosophical as a Kantianism of Marx or a structuralism of Marx. To revel in the failure  
of Marxism is to revel in the proof that Marxism can lapse back to an immanence with the one, that Marxism does not need to be productive 
in any way (like capitalism must constantly be).So  for  Laruelle  failure  is  good  because  it  indicates  that  Marxism  is  
not trying to go outside of itself to a)ect other things. It indicates Marx-ism's insuficientcy. Thus, ironically, the recession of Marxism is the first 
step  toward  considering  its  radical  universality,  because  via  recession 

    125 26/08/2014   5:06:16 PM

:!6  Capitalism
Marxism is all that much closer to its own true immanence with itself. Any failure of Marxism, or if you like communism, in, for example, the 
historical conjuncture of "%+" when soldiers descended from Versailles in wholesale slaughter of the Parisian communards, cannot be explained 
internally by Marxism itself. "A marxist concept of the conjuncture can not  explain  the  failure  of Marxism,  but only  o)er  a specular doubling  

of it."26In  other  words,  Marxism  can  never  truly  be  understood  in  its  universality if it is read simply as a corrective or reactionary force vis- a`- vis the  historical  gains  of  capitalism.  So  if  Baudrillard  told  us  to  "forget  
Foucault" in  order  better  to  understand  the  totality  of  power, here  we must "forget capitalism" in order to arrive at a universal Marxism, unfettered by any synthesis or rebirth forged through failure.Unidirectional and irreversible determination, for Laruelle, is necessary for a truly and radically immanent ontology. But, he cautions, this  is  not  a  Marxian  immanence,  because  axiomatically  all  immanence  is 
immanence in the real (equivalent to immanence in the one). "It is the immanence (of) the Real as cause," writes Laruelle, "and thus an immanence non immanent to Marxism."27This brings us to the fourth theme, incommensurability. Herein is contained Laruelle's ultimate incompatibility with Althusser. For if Althusser warned his readers to begin after Part I of Capital-- Don't look at Part I, 
put it aside-- it is only within Part I that Marx o)ers his best description of incommensurability.

Recall again Jameson's first riddle of Capital; the riddle revolves around the seeming impossibility of equating two qualitatively di)erent things. 
The key to incommensurability is therefore use- value. Use- value, Marx instructs, is the "substance" of value, the "usefulness" of something. Use- 
value  is  understood  in  terms  of  physical  bodies  that  are  qualitatively  di)erent,  and  hence,  because  they  share  no  scale  of  measurement  in 
common, are absolutely incommensurable with each other.In this way, use- value in Marx reveals a rudimentary theory of immanence,  because  objects  are  de!ned  strictly  by  way  of  an  identity  with themselves, never forced to go outside themselves into the form of something else. The consummation of a use- value, in, for example, the eating of an apple, constitutes a "relation without relation": I may eat the apple 
and have a "relation" to it as I chew it up and digest it, but its qualities, 

    126 26/08/2014   5:06:16 PM

  Capitalism  :!7
even as they are consumed by me, act unidirectionally and irreversibly on me, on my tongue, in my stomach and digestive system, and indeed 
on my health and state of mind. For Laruelle there is no common mea-sure between the one and its clones. As a unilateral duality, they constitute a relation without a relation.
If  previously  DLI  revealed  a  brute  ontological  obliviousness,  incom-mensurability  reveals  what  might  be  called  "Laruelle's  autism."  Non- 
philosophy  is  unable  to  form  conventional  relationships,  except  those mediated by a more scientific posture. The absolute radiance of the one 
leaves  its  clones  (entities,  worlds,  persons)  as  generically  ordinary  but also solitary. Laruelle's entities are nearsighted, myopic, shut in. Like the 
autist, they do not form relations of mediation via normative channels. But so too are they locked out of immediate communion with the one, 
immediacy  being  in  Laruelle's  estimation  simply  a  perverted  form  of mediation. Recall that Laruelle's goal is never to make thought and being 
immediate to each other, but rather to maintain the duality of the two as an identity.

But have I just pathologized non- philosophy a second time, first call-ing it oblivious and now autistic? That is not the intention, for the aim of 
these two descriptors is to underscore the "immedia" evident in Laruelle, his rigorous  nulli!cation of the  standard- model  approaches to  mediation. It is only here that Laruelle is able to be understood as an anticapi-talist, indeed one of the most aggressive anticapitalists in the history of 
thought.It is not so much that Laruelle comes out against capitalism with this 
or that political strategy, with this or that economic policy. Rather, Laru-elle's anticapitalism is rooted not in a critique of the mode of production, 
but in the discovery that the material base is itself ontologically incom-patible with exchange.

The ultimate issue, which even Althusser could not see or at least would not accept, is that in order to remove Hegel from Marx it is necessary  
to go to the limit. One must not simply remove the "more philosophical" parts,  the  youthful  Marx,  the  metaphysical,  even  sometimes  idealist, 
Marx. In order to !x the Hegelian roots within Marx, one must not simply replace a bourgeois philosophy with a more rigorous dialectical science. 
The solution is not more dialectics, but less. In order to remove Hegel 

    127 26/08/2014   5:06:16 PM

:!8  Capitalism
from  Marx,  one  must  remove  the  dialectic  entirely.  Such  is  Laruelle's essential aim, a Marxism without dialectics.

Is this not the ultimate contradiction of Marxism itself: how to foment to the brink of revolution a certain kind of proletarian history that will 
obviate  the  need  for  any  future  history.  Lenin,  for  instance,  was  con-cerned  not  simply  with  how  to  make  revolution  but  how  to  make  it  
last,  not  simply  the  end  of  the  tsar's  dictatorship  but  the  forging  of  a  new dictatorship, this time of the proletariat. Althusser's concern is not 
simply the supersession of idealist philosophy, but its supersession at the hands  of  a  new  higher  orthodoxy,  what  he  called  the  science of "pure 
thought" itself or the dialectic as "Logic."28Is the ultimate form of Marxism still dialectical or the indication of an 
absolute absence of the dialectic? One might return to an earlier moment, to  the  German  Marxist theorist Karl  Korsch  (rejected  by  Kautsky  and 
Stalin alike) and recall his assertion, essentially incompatible with Althus-serianism and many other varieties of Marxism, that "Marxian theory 
constitutes neither a positive materialistic philosophy nor a positive sci-ence."

29 Korsch's suggestion is that one must be permanently critical and 

hence vigilant against the ossi!cation of Marxian or party orthodoxy as a newfound dogma. Marxism is critical not positive, wrote Korsch. It is 

general not total. Such a modest and provisional view of Marxian science is perhaps a bit closer to Laruelle's method than that of Althusser.

Yet whatever the answer for others, Laruelle's position is clear. He seeks an immediacy without mediation. He seeks a !nite determinacy without 
abstraction. He seeks a "last philosophy," not a return to "first philoso-phy." In short, he seeks a Marx without dialectical synthesis.

According  to  Laruelle,  the  question  for  Marx  is  not  "how  to  break with Hegel" but "how to break with philosophy itself."

30 For Marx, Hegel 

was  merely  philosophy's  most  recent  and  dazzling  avatar.  Marx's  reti-cence  toward  Hegel  is,  for  Laruelle,  indication  of  a  non- philosophical 

instinct  already  implicit  in  Marx.  The  eleventh  thesis  on  Feuerbach  is only the most obvious and pithy evidence of this. In other words Marx 
himself was seeking non- philosophy, whether he called it by that name or  not,  by  breaking  with  philosophy  and  shifting  toward  the  practical 
science of political economy.But the question for Laruelle is not the same. The issue for him is not 
how to break with what came before, to break with Marx or Marxism. 

    128 26/08/2014   5:06:16 PM

  Capitalism  :!9
Such a break would only proliferate new philosophical discourses, and  as such would fall out of the purview of non- philosophy entirely. "Not to 
recognize marxism but to know it" is Laruelle's intuition. "To discover it rather than to rediscover it."

31

To "recognize" or "rediscover" Marx would be to  reflect on him. But a properly rigorous and immanent science of the Marxian infrastructure 

would do no such thing. It would withdraw from the decision to  reflect, and discover the immanent destiny of nature, perhaps for the first time.

Meditations on last philosophy. To ask the question "What is philoso-phy?"  typically  requires  that  the  philosopher  return  to  the  origins  of 
thought, to plumb the depths of being in pursuit of its foundations. This is what Kant does in the Critique of Pure Reason, what Heidegger does  
in Being and Time, and even what Deleuze and Guattari do in What Is Philosophy? It is the most emblematic philosophical chore, to return to 
first principles.However  Laruelle  does  no  such  thing.  This  kind  of  question  is  the 
very question he refuses to answer, refuses even to pose. Not what phi-losophy? Not how philosophy? Not even where or when philosophy? If 
Laruelle asks anything, he asks Why philosophy? And, more important, Why not? Why not no philosophy?

Avoiding his own first principles, then, Laruelle passes instead to the last, the last principles, or more precisely the last instance. Where philosophy is always vying to be first, non- philosophy is content to be last. After all, Laruelle's one is no prime mover, no ultimate substance. The 
reverse is true, in fact: Laruelle's one is a "last mover," a !nite and generic real.

"The  question  Quid  facti?  is  the  object  of  metaphysics,"  remarked Deleuze in his book on Kant.

32 What is the fact of knowledge? Not this or 

that  particular  piece  of  knowledge,  what  Laruelle  calls  the  "regional knowledges," but the very condition of knowledge itself, its fact.

From Kant to Foucault and beyond, the pervasive question of philoso-phy is not so much what something is, or even how something behaves, 
but what are the conditions of possibility for any x whatsoever? In other words, if Plato asks what is truth, Kant asks what are the conditions of 

possibility for truth? Kant makes the stakes known on many occasions: "How is metaphysics at all possible?" "How is cognition from pure reason 

    129 26/08/2014   5:06:16 PM

:3;  Capitalism
possible?" "How are synthetic propositions a priori possible?" "How is pure mathematics possible?"

33 Not so much what is philosophy, but what 

are the conditions of possibility for philosophy itself?The two questions are ultimately the same though, because philosophy, 

as Laruelle de!nes it, is synonymous with the decision to reveal the condi-tions of possibility for philosophy. In this sense, Kant would be, in Laruelle's opinion, a philosopher par excellence, a philosopher raised to the second power, for Kant is not simply enacting the philosophical decision 
(and thus doing philosophy), nor  reflecting on the philosophical decision (asking what is philosophy), but rather demonstrating the philosophical 
meta- conditions for any kind of philosophical  reflection whatsoever.This is why Laruelle never "returns to first principles," as many philosophers are wont to do. He never seeks to found a new philosophy or to reinvigorate an existing one by  reflecting on its own specificity. He is no 
modernist, after all. Instead Laruelle seeks the "last principles." And if any-thing Laruelle's work is a question of "last philosophy." Deviating from the 
aspirations of Descartes's Meditations on First Philosophy, Laruelle's proj-ect constitutes an inexhaustible series of Meditations on Last Philosophy.

But Laruelle's "last" is not a chronological last. It is a messianic last. Laruelle's last philosophy is last only in the sense of Marx's "last instance," 
an immanent and !nite lastness that  reflects nothing, supersedes noth-ing, and indeed is not a "meditation" at all in the proper sense of the term 
as  reflection- on or consciousness- of. Rather, in- the- last- instance means roughly "in the most generic sense." Laruelle's messianism is therefore 
neither ancient nor modern, neither special nor particular. But merely generic. The last, the least, the !nite.

So if it is indeed fair to label Laruelle's work a series of "meditations on last philosophy," a basic characteristic begins to emerge: Laruelle's work is 
a rational messianism, a messianism of reason-- or as he would likely put it, "the messianic without the messiah." With a stress given not to first 
philosophy, but to last philosophy (as non- philosophy), Laruelle injects a messianic temporality into thinking. Under such messianic temporality non- philosophy dualizes-- Deleuze would say "virtualizes"-- the first and the last, the prior and the posterior, the a priori and the a posteriori 
into a metastable identity of after- before and before- after. Indeed, as in Matthew -,:"$, the last shall be first, and the first last.

    130 26/08/2014   5:06:16 PM

!"#$%&'()%#*+)*+#,*'--.%-)/+%0-'*1%
s e v e n
The Black Universe

Part II began the process of withdrawing from the standard model. Rely-ing first on Deleuze and Marx, we saw the di*culties of actually existing 
digitality. With the infrastructure of the world understood as essentially digital and computational, a number of alternative logics and conditions 
become  important,  among  them  the  irreversibility  of  relation  and  the generic determination of the material base.

Several  areas  remain  to  be  explored.  Because  if  the  event  and  the  prevent operate  on being as apparently "political" forces,  the one bent  
on transforming it internally and the other on rendering it determined and  impersonal,  the  exact  nature  of  these  forces  remains  to  be  seen.  
Are the event and the prevent merely two di)erent avatars for the politi-cal, or do they reveal the distinction between the political and the ethical? Such is the agenda of the last two chapters of the book, chapters # and ",.

Yet before addressing the political and the ethical in earnest, we turn to the art and science of the one. Aesthetics is a recurring theme in Laruelle's work. He has written two short books on photography and has sev-eral essays on art and related topics, including texts on color, light, seeing, drawing, dance, music, and technology.Technology or science? And what of art? Laruelle's position on these 
di)erent domains is not entirely intuitive. For example, he does not follow someone like Heidegger and reestablish a lineage from technology back 
to art, via the Greek concept of techn7. Nor is he phobic of science follow-ing those skeptical of industrial modernity. Instead Laruelle is some thing 

:33

    133 26/08/2014   5:06:16 PM

:34  The Black Universe
of a purist about technology and science. He denigrates technology and elevates  science,  elevating  it  to  such  a  degree  that  it  becomes  synonymous with non- standard philosophy overall.1The technology that surrounds us, from cars to computers to rocket 
ships, is all rather repulsive for Laruelle. Such technology provides little more than an avenue for transit or mediation in and out of things. From 
this perspective philosophy is the ultimate technology, because philoso-phy is the ultimate vehicle of transit, and philosophers the ultimate mailmen.  Philosophy  is  all  technology  wrapped  into  one,  for  it  is  at  once mirror, conveyance, energizer, and processor. By contrast, science is the 
realm of immanence and unilateral relation. Science is the realm of dis-covery,  axiomatics,  and  theory.  If  philosophy  were  a  science  it  would 
remain immanent to itself, never transiting anywhere, never synthesiz-ing or  reflecting on anything.

Philosophy  would  remain  where  it  is,  in  the  dark.  But  philosophy, always quick  to  demonstrate  its  illuminating  potential,  is  never  in  the 
dark.  "Our  philosophers  are  children,"  Laruelle  reminds  us.  They  are children "who are afraid of the Dark."

2

Alternations of light and dark are the fuel of philosophy. From Plato's cave to Paul de Man's "blindness and insight," philosophers are forever 

transiting  between  shadow  and  illumination.  Yet  darkness  itself  is  not the problem. The problem is alternation. The problem is not that philosophy is dark. The problem is that philosophy is not dark enough.According to Laruelle we must jump further, not from light to dark 
but from dark to black, from the darkness of philosophy to the blackness of science. So forget your rocket ships and rocket cars. Leave behind the 
sca)olding of  reflection and alternation. "Do not think technology first," Laruelle commands. "Think science first."

3

Science  is,  in  this  way,  the  least  illuminating  profession,  because  it  surpasses mere darkness by way of a profound blackness. Never afraid of 

the dark, Laruelle's science begins from the posture of the black, com-muning with the agnostic darkness of the real.

But what is this darkness? What is this black universe of which Laruelle sings? Is black a color, and if so can we see it?

"Philosophy is thinking by way of a generalized `black box'; it is the e$ort to  !t  black  into  light  and  to  push  it  back  to  the  rear  of  the  caverns."

4 

    134 26/08/2014   5:06:16 PM

  The Black Universe  :35
Alternations  between black and white drive philosophy, but they have also long been the subject of art, from chiaroscuro in Caravaggio, to the 
shadows in Night of the Hunter ("#00). Just as there is an art of light, there is also an art of dark. Just as art has forever pursued what Victorian critic 
Matthew Arnold called "sweetness and light," it has also been corrupted by the gloomy gloaming of blackest black.

What  are  the  great  explorations  of  black  in  art? Chief among  them would be the Malevich square, or Ad Reinhardt's black paintings, or the 
Rothko Chapel in Houston, or some of Stan Brakhage's !lms with their murky darkness, or Guy Debord's notorious "Howls for Sade" ("#0-), a 
!lm that uses its blackness as a kind of weapon. But is the black screen  in Debord truly black? Is the Reinhardt canvas a black canvas?

All these heroic experiments are no more black than a bright summer day. As attempts to capture black they are abject failures, and all the worse 
for  trying  to  be  so  avant- garde,  so  utterly  modern.  Such  meditations  on the color black are quickly revealed to be what they are, meditations. 
Black appears only in alternation with white, just as quietude is punctu-ated by noise, and immobile finitude by in!nite mobility.

The black screen in "Howls for Sade" is not black, but a black box. The !lm o)ers us blackness, but only in as much as the blackness can withdraw from other things, in this case from whiteness or from the audi- ble voice. These are all works of alternation, of oscillation into and out  
of  the  black.  Thus  they  are  properly  labeled  " reflections"  on  black--  even "howls" for black-- because black never appears in these artworks, 
only the optical alternations of black- against- white, black- against- color, or black- against- sound.

Deleuze  explains  such  phenomena  near  the  end  of  his  writings  on  cinema:

"The absence of image," the black screen or the white screen, have a decisive importance in contemporary cinema. . . . They no longer have a simple 
function of punctuation, as if they marked a change, but enter into a dialectical relation between the image and its absence, and assume a properly 
structural value. . . . Used in this way, the screen becomes the medium for 
variations:  the  black  screen  and  the  under- exposed  image,  the  intense 
blackness which lets us guess at dark volumes in process of being constituted, or the black marked by a !xed or moving luminous point, and all 

    135 26/08/2014   5:06:16 PM

:36  The Black Universe

the combinations of black and !re; the white screen and the over- exposed 
image, the milky image, or the snowy image whose dancing seeds are to 
take shape.5

Reinhardt's paintings are the ultimate false lure. What appears at first glance to be black quickly shifts into a complex economy of micro shades 
of black, each with a di)erent tone and luminosity. Richard Serra's draw-ings using black paint sticks-- or some of Gerhard Richter's works-- are 
similar in their reinvention of an entire color cosmos thriving both on the interior of black and as black relates to its own exterior.

There is thus nothing black about these works,  just as there is little silence in that notorious John Cage composition 8'%%'' in which no notes 
are played. Instead, these works are works of division and alternation, of contrasted extremities, of absence appearing as presence and presence 
returning to absence. These are meditative works,  reflective works, great metaphysical works, great philosophical works even. But at the same time, 
merely  reflective, merely metaphysical, merely philosophical."Philosophers have divided up the undivided simplicity of the nothingness and the all," Laruelle reminds us, "but human eyes have never divided up the unique night."

6 The universe is, for Laruelle, a night universe, and to look at the universe means to look into the darkness of the night.  "Vision  is  foundational  when  it  abandons  perception  and  sees-  

in- the- night."7 In other words, vision is never vision when the lights are ablaze. Vision is only vision when it looks avidly into the pitch black of 
night. Likewise art will never be art until it ceases to represent and begins to look into the Stygian monochrome, that blackness that has yet to be 
exposed to any living light.8Is this all just another (avor of modern nihilism? Just another exis- 
tentialism?  Laruelle  answers  no:  "The  philosophical  eye  wants  to  see  the nothing in man's eye rather than see nothing. The philosopher wants 
to  look  man's  nothingness  in  the  eye  rather  than  be  a  nothingness  of vision"-- nothing in man's eye versus seeing nothing.

9 Recall those horrible nothing worlds of the existentialists. The existentialist can see man as nothing; the existentialist might even be able to see the world as nothing. But he cannot yet see nothing as nothing.Philosophers  have  long  asked  why  there  is  something  rather  than 
nothing. For Aristotle the question was always: Why is there something 

    136 26/08/2014   5:06:16 PM

  The Black Universe  :37
rather than something else? For Nietzsche or Kierkegaard it was: Why is there  nothing  rather  than  something?  But  for  Laruelle  the  question  is 
poorly formed from the outset. For Laruelle the question might rather be, Why, in looking at nothing, do we still never see nothing? For as Parmenides said, nothing comes from nothing. "Man is this middle between night  and  nothing"  writes  Laruelle.  Or  rather,  "less  than  this  middle: 
nothing which is only nothing; night which is only night."10But still, what is this darkness, and where is the light? How does dark 
relate to black, and light to white?
What is a hermeneutic light? Of the many unresolved debates surround-ing  the  work  of  Heidegger,  the  following  question  returns  with  some 
regularity: Is Heidegger's phenomenology ultimately a question of herme-neutics and interpretation, or is it ultimately a question of immanence and 
truth? Is Dasein forever questing after a Being that withdraws, or does it somehow achieve a primordial communion with the truth of Being? In 
other words, is Heidegger the philosopher of blackness or the philoso-pher of light?

Hermeneutics was an important topic for theory in the "#$,s. Hence it is not surprising that Heidegger, who was being rediscovered and rethought during that period, would often be framed in terms of hermeneu-tics. To be sure, the critical tradition handed down from post- structuralism 
leaves little room for modes of immanence and immediacy, modes that were marginalized as essentialist or otherwise unpleasant (often for good 
reason).  Thus  it  would  be  easy  to  assimilate  into  the  tradition  of  her-meneutics a !gure  like  Heidegger, with his  complicated withdrawal of 
Being. For where else would he !t?Indeed it is common to categorize Heidegger there. But is it not also 
possible to show that Heidegger is a philosopher of immanence? Is it not also possible to show that he speaks as much to illumination as to withdrawal? That he speaks as much to the intuitive and proximate as to the detached and distanced?

For instance, consider his treatment of gelichtet, a word stemming from the  noun  for  "light."  In  the  chapter  on  the  "there"  in  Being  and  Time, 
Heidegger speaks of Dasein as lumen (one of two Latin words meaning "light") and de!nes Dasein in terms of the "clearing" (gelichtet) or "illumination" of Being:

    137 26/08/2014   5:06:16 PM

:38  The Black Universe

When we talk in an ontically !gurative way of the lumen naturale in man, 
we have in mind nothing other than the existential- ontological structure 
of this entity, that it is in such a way as to be its "there". To say that it is 
`illuminated' ["erleuchtet"] means that as Being- in- the- world it is cleared 
[gelichtet] in itself, not through any other entity, but in such a way that it 
is itself the clearing.11

No one can deny the cryptological tendencies in Heidegger. No one can deny  that,  for  Heidegger, Being  likes to  hide  itself. But this  is  far  outweighed by the fact that Dasein can indeed be experienced as an authentic disclosedness of Being, by the fact that phenomenology preaches-- without irony or pathos-- that one may strive "toward the things themselves" and actually arrive at them.

Recall that hermeneutics is the science of suspicion, the science of the insincere. But Heidegger, like Socrates before him, is the consummate 
philosopher of sincerity. The phenomenological subject is the one who has an authentic and sincere relationship with Being. Because of this, we 
should not be too quick to consign Heidegger to the history of hermeneu-tics. Hermes's natural habitat is teeming with deception; his economies 
are economies in the absence of trust. But Heidegger lives in a di)erent world. His world is a world of authentic presence, of questing after truth.

Thus  running  in  parallel  to  the  Hermes- Heidegger,  the  Heidegger who touches on the tradition of interpretation and exchange in the face 
of the withdrawal of Being, there is also an Iris- Heidegger, the Heidegger who touches on the tradition of illumination and iridescence along the 
pathway of  seeking. Heidegger's  is not simply  a Hermes  narrative, but also an Iris arc.

12

When Heidegger evokes the lumen naturale of mankind he is making reference to one of two kinds of light. The light of mankind is a terrestrial light. When bodies with their anima (their vital force) are vigorous and alive, they are illuminated with the light of the lumen naturale. Lumen 
is the light of life, the light of this world, the light that sparkles from the eyes of consciousness.

But there is a second type of light. Being carries its own light that is not the light of man. This light is a cosmological light, a divine light, the 
light of the phenomena, light as grace, or, as Laruelle says, the kind of light that does not originate from a star.

    138 26/08/2014   5:06:16 PM

  The Black Universe  :39

So just as there are two Heideggers, there are also two lights. One light is the light of transparent bodies, clear and mobile. It is the light of this 
world, experienced through passage and illumination. The other light is the  light of opaque bodies. It is the  light of color, a holy light, experienced only through the dull emanation of things.
Dioptrics and catoptrics. If there exists a natural lightness, is there not also a natural darkness? And if there are two kinds of light are there not 
also two kinds of dark?Such  questions  lie  at  the  heart  of  Reza  Negarestani's  Cyclonopedia: 
Complicity with Anonymous Materials, a hallucinatory mix of theory and !ction that views the Earth as a quasi- living, demonic creature, oil the 
blood in its veins. Oil petroleum is black, of course, in color if not also in its moral decrepitude. But oil is also light, because it is a transmutation 
of the light of the sun. Oil is the geological product of sunlight, first via photosynthesis into vegetable matter, and second via the decomposition 
of vegetable matter over time. In this sense, oil is, as Negarestani calls it, the "black corpse of the sun."

13

But before looking more closely at the two kinds of darkness, let us examine the two kinds of lightness a bit further. Negarestani writes about 

fog and light. He writes about the "mistmare." But what is mist? He writes of Pazuzu, the wind, the dust enforcer. But what is dust?

Of course, dust and fog have certain obfuscatory qualities. They stran-gle the light and interfere with one's ability to see. But at the same time 
they have their own form of luminosity. Fog glows with a certain ambi-ence. It transforms a space of absolute coordinates into a proximal zone 
governed by thresholds of intelligibility. (Fog is thus first and foremost a category  of  existence-- there  can  be  no  ontological  fog;  that  would  be 
something else.) Fog is a dioptric phenomenon, even if ironically it acts to impede vision. It is a question of light passing through materials, and 
likewise  a question  of the light of mankind passing through (or being impeded from passing through) a proximal space. This means that fog  
is part of the luminaria. Fog gives o) no light of its own, even if it has its own luminosity by virtue of !ltering and passing along a light originating from elsewhere.The term dioptric has been broached, and in order to continue it will 
be necessary to de!ne this term in some detail, along with the related 

    139 26/08/2014   5:06:16 PM

:4;  The Black Universe
term  catoptric.  These  two  terms  are  part  of  the  science  of  optics,  and hence the being of light, but they describe the dealings of light in two 
very di)erent ways.Dioptrics refers to light when it is refracted, that is to say, when light 
passes through transparent materials such as glass or water. As a branch of optical science, dioptrics is concerned principally with lenses. Yet things 
not specifically conceived as lenses can also act as such. Some of the best examples  are  the  tiny  water  droplets  contained  in  clouds,  spherical  in 
shape, that allow light passing through them to refract twice, once as the light  enters  the  droplet  and  again  as  it  leaves.  Prisms  also  o)er  a  !ne 
illustration of dioptric phenomena; like a water  droplet, a prism splits light into color bands because di)erent wavelengths of light refract differently. A dioptric device can therefore divide white light into colored light, just as it can merge colored light into white light again, given the 
right conditions.Catoptrics refers to light when it is re9ected, that is to say, when light 
bounces o) objects in the world. Whereas dioptrics is concerned with lenses, catoptrics is concerned principally with mirrors. All sorts of objects 
can act as mirrors proper-- polished glass or metal, the surface of water. But catoptrics also includes the duller quasi- mirror e)ects of plain objects, 
which  reflect light and allow themselves to be visible to the eye. Just as the prism can produce what Goethe called "physical color," there is also 
a  color  capacity  in  catoptric  phenomena,  because  some  objects   reflect certain  colors  and  absorb  others  (Goethe's  "chemical  color").  So  if,  in 
general, dioptric phenomena are the phenomena of prisms and lenses, catoptric phenomena are the phenomena of mirrors, screens, walls, and 
opaque surfaces.In short, the former is a question of transparency, while the latter is  
a question of opacity. Dioptrics is a perspective (seeing through), while catoptrics is a speculum or aspect ( reflecting, looking at).

14

Recall the god of so many aspects, so many epithets. He is Hermes, messenger  to  Zeus.  And  yet  his  counterpart  Iris,  messenger  to  Hera,  

has  relatively  few  epithets;  her  business  is  that  of  shining  through.  In  this way Hermes is the aspect god, the god of catoptrics, and Iris is the 
perspective goddess, the goddess of dioptrics. The e)ects of refraction "remain within" a transparent physical object such as a glass lens, and 
hence are to be considered a phenomenon of immanence. By contrast 

    140 26/08/2014   5:06:17 PM

  The Black Universe  :4:
the e)ects of  reflection are to obscure the source object, to leverage the very opacity of the object for some other end, and hence they are to be 
considered a phenomenon of hermeneutics.These same principles can be stated in di)erent terms. Both dioptrics 
and catoptrics have a special relationship to depth; however, the distinc-tion between the two could not be more stark.  reflection is semiotically 
deep, that is, it is deep in the domain of meaning, whereas refraction is experientially deep, that is, it is deep in the domain of subjective experience. Saying "semiotically deep" means that opaque  reflection creates a depth model wherein two opposing layers, one manifest and one latent, 
work together to create meaning. This is the same depth model that exists in Freud or Marx. Saying "experientially deep" means that transparent 
refraction creates a depth model wherein a real sense of volumetric space is  created  and  presented  to  a  viewing  subject.  This  is  the  same  depth 
model that exists in Heidegger (or even in others like Kant). There are veils  covering  the  soul,  but  there  are  also  telescopes  for  viewing  the 
heavens-- the one is an aspect, the other a perspective.Yet beyond exhibiting depth in two contrasting ways, catoptrics and 
dioptrics are also equally distinct in how they deal with (atness. Being semiotically deep, catoptric  reflection is at the same time ontically (at. 
That  is  to  say,   reflection  is  manifest  in  two- dimensional  surfaces  and other (at things arranged in the world. The very existence of the  reflected 
image is a (at existence.Dioptric refraction, however, being experientially deep, is at the same 
time ontologically (at. That is to say, refraction is immanent to materials; there is no transcendent or metaphysical cause that operates across or 
after the being of the phenomenon. This is why whatever is immanent also must be (at. This variety of (atness is best understood as a (atness 
of identity, a selfsame quality vis- a`- vis the being of the thing. Dioptric refraction, as iridescent immanence, "remains within" itself.

These  claims,  being  somewhat  abstract, should  be  explained  a little further. We have asserted that dioptrics is experiential. What this means 
is that dioptrics is on the side of the subject. Dioptrics is always a ques-tion  of  crafting  a  clear  or  real  subjective  experience.  This  is  why  the  
concept of dioptric illumination is so closely associated with the mod- ern period, why we refer to "the Enlightenment"-- which the French render with even less subtlety as les Lumie`res. But it is also why this same 

    141 26/08/2014   5:06:17 PM

:4!  The Black Universe
modern trajectory ends up at Kantianism, at romanticism, and eventually at  Heidegger  and  phenomenology,  because  the  question  of  subjective 
experience must always remain at the heart of the modern experience.By contrast, we said previously that catoptrics is semiotic. What this 
means is that catoptrics is on the side of matter, on the side of the phar-makon. Catoptrics is always a question of meaning. Although subjects 
might be involved, the process is never primarily subjective. Rather the process is primarily a question of what Stiegler terms hypomnesis, the act 
of externalizing the subject-- or to be more precise, the subject's memory-- into material supports. This too is a modern trajectory, but it ends up at 
a di)erent place: not in the illumination of the subject, but in the obscu-rantism of the culture industries, in spectacle, in ideology, and in the tradition of critique that terminates in structuralism and post- structuralism.Jesuit  mathematician  Franc,ois  d'Aguilon,  in  two  propositions  from 
his early seventeenth- century opus on optics Opticorum Libri Sex, o)ers two additional points concerning the di)erence between dioptric transparency  and  catoptric  opacity.  The  two  points  appear  in  propositions number ." and .- of book ":

Proposition ."-- Lux [light] and color are the properties of an opaque body.
Proposition .--- Lumen [illumination, luminosity] is the action of a transparent body.15

The distinction between two kinds of light made by d'Aguilon is the same distinction made since ancient times: in Latin lux and lumen; in Greek 

phos (:;!) and phoster (:=0&?*); or in Hebrew or () and maor ().Recall the echo that occurs between Genesis ":. and ":"/, when God 
creates light, and  then creates it  a second  time  (see  Francisco de  Hol-anda, Fiant luminaria in !rmamento celi, the frontispiece of this chapter). The echo nicely captures the di)erence between the two kinds of light. The first time light comes into the world it comes as lux. This lux 
means light, but it is a special kind of light, the light of being, the light of God,  a  cosmological  light.  The  second  time  light  comes,  it  comes  as 
lumen (or rather as luminaria, the things that show lumen). This lumen also  means  light,  but  only  in  a  very  specific  way.  Lumen  means  sun, 

moon, and stars-- the bodies that give light in as much as they can shine through with the divine light.

    142 26/08/2014   5:06:17 PM

  The Black Universe  :43

Although the English language di)erentiates between light and lumi-nosity, English often loses the subtlety between the two kinds of light. 
D'Aguilon assigns the first term to opaque bodies, and thus, by associa-tion  we  may  be  certain  that  he  speaks  of  catoptric  phenomenon.  The 
second he assigns to transparent bodies, and thus to dioptric phenome-non. In other words, lux is catoptric and lumen is dioptric.

There is a precedence here too. For just as the Renaissance preceded the Baroque, lux in Genesis ":. precedes lumen in Genesis ":"/, and catoptrics precedes dioptrics. Descartes would con!rm this same sentiment  in a "$.% letter written a few years after d'Aguilon: "Light, that is, lux, is  
a  movement  or  an  action  in  the  luminous  body,  and  tends  to  cause  some movement in transparent bodies, namely lumen. Thus lux is before 
lumen."16 (The firstness of Iris arrives, then, as a kind of counterintuitive miracle, scrapping all precedence, erasing diachrony for synchrony.)

In this way God, bearing the lux light of the cosmological !at, is abso-lute in His opacity. God is the absolute source of light, but at the same 
time the one who is absolutely inaccessible. Opacity is the quality that  we can assign to His being. Yet, the light of lumen-- illumination, luminosity-- is absolute in its transparency, as it travels through the actually existing world. Thus transparency is the quality that we can assign to His 
existing.This is the second point that can be gained from d'Aguilon's two propositions, that lumen or dioptrics is always an action of existence, an active motion of looking- throughness, while lux or catoptrics is always a fact of 
being (a property).
The black corpse of the sun. Now we are in a better position to consider the kinds of darkness and their relationship to the light. To summarize, 
illumination (lumen) refers to the action of transparent bodies in their luminosity and radiant iridescence. These bodies are the sun, the moon 
and stars, !re and mankind. Not white so much as bright. It is the light of life and consciousness. It is multiple, never singular. It is a perspective, 
and therefore allied with dioptrics and Iris.By contrast, light (lux) refers to the property of an opaque body in its 
fact of being. This is the light of God, the light of being, a cosmologi- cal light, but also the light of daytime (as opposed to sunlight). It is an 
aspect,  and  therefore  allied  with  catoptrics  and  Hermes.  It  is  singular, 

    143 26/08/2014   5:06:17 PM

:44  The Black Universe
never multiple. It is white only in so much as it is the whiteness of pure opacity. Lux is the plenum. It is the obscure. It is grace.

Now  on  to  the  darkness.  Here  too  are  two  modalities,  all  the  more  di)erent because of their near identity. Darkness may be gloom, murkiness, shadow, or shade. It may be dusk, night, or twilight. Bodies may be dark. One might speak of "dark" materials, in as much as they are asleep, 
unconsciousness, dead, or cold. Likewise, habit or cliche' may be under-stood  as  a  kind  of  darkness  of  experience,  an  inability  to  revivify  the 
normal routine of living.Hence the darkening, or obscuritas, described in Revelation #:---obscuratus  est  sol  et  aer  de  fumo  putei,  "The  sun  was  darkened,  and  the  air,  by the smoke of the pit." The sun is obscured by smoke, and hence the 
earthbound  shadows  of  an  obscuring  darkness.  As  the  sun  and  moon and stars are progressively snu)ed out, they are obscurare. It is not yet a 
question of ontological darkness, but rather the darkness of the world.  It is the nihil privativum discussed in Schopenhauer, the "privative nothing" that is dark by virtue of depriving the light.But  there  is  another  kind  of  darkness,  the  tenebrae,  the  shadows  
of  black  being  separated  from  the  lux  of  heaven  in  Genesis  (-,  /,  0,  and "%). No longer simply dark, the question now is that of a profound 
blackness.Such is the generic darkness of the abyss, the void and vacuum, the 
darkness  of  catastrophe  and  cataclysm.  It  is  a  cosmological  blackness, the black of Satan, the black of absolute evil, the black of nonbeing. It is 
what  Thacker  describes  as  "cosmic  pessimism . . .  hermeticism  of  the abyss."

17

The shadows of black being are a hermeneutic blackness. Not simply a world gone dark, such blackness is a world without us. Not simply a 

question  of  dying  or  growing  cold,  such  blackness  means  the  leaving  of  being.  In  contrast  to  the  "privative  nothing"  comes  Schopenhauer's 
nihil  negativum  ("negative  nothing"),  nothing  as  absolute  foreclosure.  In this sense, the shadows of black being are not part of any ontology, but 
rather constitute an encryption or crypto- ontology. These are the shad-ows  of  the  kruptos  (1*+?&,!),  the  hidden  parts  that  form  the  inward 
nature of things.And hence in Revelation, beyond the sun being obscured and made 
dark,  there  is  also  a  secondary  darkness.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is 

    144 26/08/2014   5:06:17 PM

  The Black Universe  :45
threatened secondarily by the  blackness of the  tenebrae, for ultimately factum est regnum eius tenebrosum, "His kingdom was full of darkness" 
(Revelation "$:",).Return now to Negarestani and the petroleum that fuels contemporary society. Is this oil, as putri!cation, the product of lux or lumen? Is  oil  black  or  dark?  As  Negarestani  writes,  oil  is  "Hydrocarbon  Corpse 
Juice." Sun is captured in photosynthesis, then via decay is putri!ed into a liquid fossil form. So as sun juice, oil is the darkening of sunlight. Oil  
is thus literally dead; oil is death. And as transubstantiated sunlight, oil is lumen, or at least some product thereof.

But  there  is  also  a  blackness  to  oil.  "Oil  is  the  Black  Corpse  of  the  Sun," he writes. Now no longer simply solar, oil's tellurian core wells up, 
the insurgent enemy of solar capitalism. This is oil at its blackest. This is oil as the "Devil's Excrement," oil as the conspirator-- not as lux but as 
the  tenebra  or  shadow  of  black  being-- who  annihilates  societies  by "tear[ing] them apart slowly."

18 And so, just as it was possible to speak of 

the shadows of black being as a crypto- ontology, Negarestani can speak of a crypto- ontology for oil. In such a crypto- ontology, oil is understood 

not simply as dark but as radical blackness, held in escrow by a cosmic pessimism, with its kruptos or hidden parts absolutely foreclosed to us, 
but also to being itself.
Blackness is a crypto- ontology absolutely foreclosed to being. Only through this !nal de!nition-- black as kruptos foreclosed to being-- can we begin 
to understand what Laruelle means by the black universe. Only by way of a withdrawal from the system of light and color can we begin to see 
the generic real of blackness.Channel  that  great saint  of  radical  blackness,  Toussaint  Louverture, 
and return to the Haitian Constitution of "%,/, which stated that all citi-zens will be called black regardless of color. Such blanket totality of black, 
such  cataclysm  of  human  color,  renders  color  invalid  and  denies  the endless dynamics of black- as- white or white- as- black. Black is no longer 
the limit case, no longer the case of the slave, the poor, the indentured  or debt- ridden worker. Black is the foundation of a new uchromia, a new 
color utopia rooted in the generic black universe."Our uchromia: to learn to think from the point of view of Black as 
what determines color in the last instance rather than what limits it."19 

    145 26/08/2014   5:06:17 PM

:46  The Black Universe
Our uchromia, our non- chromia or non- color-- what does Laruelle mean by this?

As Laruelle would say, color always has a position. Color always has a stance. The color palette or the color spectrum provide a complex !eld of 
di)erence and alternation. The primary colors reside in their determin-ing  positions,  while  other  colors  compliment  each  other  as  contrasts. 
Hence the color posture: purple complimenting yellow, red compliment-ing  green,  the  primary  colors'  posture  vis- a`- vis  the  palette,  and  ultimately the posture of color itself governing the continuum of light and dark, as colors take turns emerging into a luminous and supersaturated 
visibility, or receding into a sunless gloom.20Laruelle  uses  photography  as  a  way  to  explain  these  never- ending 

quests into and out of things. "Platonism is perhaps born of the absence of a photo," he writes, proposing a provocative anachronism. "From this 
we get the model and the copy, and their common derivative in the sim-ulacrum. And Leibniz and Kant alike-- the intelligible depth of the phenomenon as much as its trenchant distinction-- !nd their possibility in this repression of photography."

21

According to Laruelle, photography has long been held captive, forced to choose between two unappetizing options,

philosophy  on  one  hand  (consciousness  and   reflection),  psychoanalysis  
on the other (the unconscious and [automatic drives]). . . . The photo is 
then neither a mode of philosophical  reflection-- even if there is plenty of 
photography  integrated  into  philosophy-- nor  a  mode  of  unconscious 
represe ntation or a return of the repressed. Neither Being nor the Other; 
neither Consciousness nor the Unconscious, neither the present nor the 
repressed.22

Photography is an ideal candidate for Laruelle's intervention, because photography  requires  that  light  penetrate  an  aperture  and  write  itself  
on a sensitive surface, resulting in prints that, in turn,  reflect light back  to viewers. "Philosophy remains an optics," he writes. "Transcendental 
no doubt, but specular: intuitiveness is its unavoidable structure. The eye is first an external empirical sense; then it is divided and doubled, the 
introduction of the other gaze constituting an a priori optical or specular 

    146 26/08/2014   5:06:17 PM

  The Black Universe  :47
!eld; then the gazes knot themselves together, form a chiasmus, and con-stitute a transcendental speculative !eld."

23

Which is precisely what Laruelle seeks to avoid. Using the language of optics invoked previously, Laruelle exhibits a unilateralized dioptrics, in 

that he rejects absolutely the reduplication and extension of the eye in favor  of  an  immanent  transparency  of  identity.  But  he  simultaneously 
exhibits a unilateralized catoptrics, in that he assigns a pure opacity to the one, a pure density, a pure imperviousness.

"The multiplication of the eye into a recursive spiral does not suppress it," he reminds us, "for the eye is the intuition that now gives the other 
eye; the gaze that opens upon the other gaze-- such is the kernel of all transcendental aesthetics."

24 Is this not the great phenomenological gambit,  that  physiognomy  is  destiny,  that  our  eyes  and  senses  orient  our-selves into a world, toward phenomena that orient and reveal themselves 

back to us?The  philosopher  says,  Humanity  was  endowed  with  the  faculty  of 
sight, so humanity must devote itself to seeing, and seeing well. But Laru-elle says, The decision is never between looking and seeing or between 
listening and hearing. That is no decision at all. The true decision, the decision already made implicitly by philosophy, is to see and hear in the 
first place. We decide each time we open our eyes.In other words, photography is always understood as color photography,  black- and- white  photography  even,  but  never  black  photography proper. Rather than these other color photographies evident in phenomenology, psychoanalysis, or philosophy at large, Laruelle writes that we need photography (now recast as non- photography) as science photography or identity photography.But what would "identity photography" mean? Identity photography 
is  black  photography.  And  thus  identity  photography  is  the  only  kind  of  photography  that  could  inscribe  the  black  universe.  Laruelle  calls  
such photography a "hyperphenomenology of the real"; it follows a logic of auto- impression,  not expression.

25 Not a  cliche' snapshot, but an  im- 

manent identity of the Real. "One does not photograph the World, the City,  History," Laruelle claims.  One  photographs  "the  identity  (of)  the 

real- in- the- last- instance."26 In this  sense, although color always carries itself in terms of a "posture" or "stance," black is immanent to itself and 

    147 26/08/2014   5:06:17 PM

:48  The Black Universe
thus can only be an in- stance, an instance, or as Laruelle says, the last instance.

"Simplify color!" he cries. "See black, think white! See black rather than believe `unconscious.' And think white rather than believe `conscious.'"

27 

Don't see, be a seer. Stop seeing and start visioning. Be a visionary.Watchers and lookers are the ones who see white, who see the thing 

that they know they will always see. But the one who sees black is the true clairvoyant. The black seer is the oracular prophet, what we call "a 
medium." And hence to understand media-- and indeed to "do" media theory-- is to start visioning purely in the black universe. Never to see 
visions, never to hallucinate (for that is what philosophers do), rather to see vision. This is what Laruelle means when he says that vision "abandons perception and sees- in- the- night."28 This is what he means when he deploys that thorny non- philosophical term of art "vision- in- One."

The blackness of the person. Laruelle's black is not simply a theory of the universe, but also a theory of the subject, what he calls the "human" or 
the "person." At the same time the black universe allows for a mystical justice that is irreducible to either Christian morality on the one hand or 
liberal ecumenicalism on the other."All  philosophical  speculation  is  communication,  and  communication  is  always speculative,"  he  writes,  in  a re- articulation  of the  media principle from Thesis I.

29 The media principle is so troublesome because 

it limits the discussion to one of two scenarios: either to speculate for or on behalf of the other, or to speculate for or about the self. The subject is 

either   reflective  or  introspective.  The  subject  is  either  too  nosy  about others or too vain about itself.

These are the two great maxims of philosophy: the first maxim, "to see for itself by seeing in the place of the other," and the second maxim, the 
ancient law of "an- eye- for- an- eye."30 This is why metaphysics is described by Laruelle in terms of vengeance. Either "an eye for an eye," the symmetrical, retributive justice of the Old Testament, or what he calls "Eye- for- the- Other,  as  hostage- of- the- Other- eye,"  the  universalization  of  liberal 
relativism where we promise to see for the other, or even, in our in!nite wisdom, to step back and let the other try to see for itself.

31 Either way, 

the eye is held hostage, vision is vengeance, and vengeance is ours.

    148 26/08/2014   5:06:17 PM

  The Black Universe  :49

Instead, the  black universe  allows  for a  mystical  subject (capable  of mystical justice) because it eliminates speculation. No more eye- for- an- 
eye, and no more eye- for- the- other. No more exchange of looks, no more patriarchal  gaze,  and  no  more  commerce  in  vision.  Instead  the  black 
universe allows for an absolutely determined and unidirectional vision, a kind of visionary vision that looks without looking.

To be clear, Laruelle does not take the usual exit; he does not escape the quandary of self- other relations by singing the praises of a universalized 
multiplicity of voices. In fact he takes a di)erent step, unexpected and rather  unfashionable  in  today's  progressive  theory  landscape.  Laruelle 
pursues  an  absolutely  determined  and  unidirectional  vision,  all  and everywhere, destiny and determination from before the first to after the 
last instance.To  summarize  before  ending-- there  are  two  kinds  of  light,  the  lux 
with its purely opaque source and the luminaria that  reflect lux into this profane world. And likewise there are two kinds of dark, the darkening 
(obscuritas) of the luminaria as they sputter out and die, and the tenebrae themselves, the shadows of black being.

But all of this, from black to white and from dark to light, is still a part of the standard model. If black is merely the absence of white, and dark 
the absence of light, then we remain locked in a world of relation, re(ec-tion, continua, and convertibility, black- as- white and dark- as- light. Such 
is the philosophical decision in a nutshell, to decide to frame the world in terms of digital color.

Laruelle, by contrast, entreats us to withdraw from the system of color and enter into a purely radical and unilaterally black universe. This is a 
universe in which black is never de!ned in terms of light, nor ultimately exchangeable with or made visible by illumination. Just like in the introduction and the secret of Hermes that has never been divulged to any living human, the black of the universe has never been seen before by 
anyone. It is only through a kind of negative intuition that we dare to call it a color at all.

This is the condition of the Laruellean person, and ultimately the con-dition for a new kind of black justice: unilaterally determined by the real, 
but  never  by  mundane  reality;  faithful  to  the  conditions  of  a  generic humanity, but never debased to the banal conditions of the world.

    149 26/08/2014   5:06:17 PM

:5;  The Black Universe

If you open your eyes partway you see white, but if you open them  all the way you see black. Do not let the philosophers draw you out of  
the cavern and into the light, only to be dazzled by the first rays of the sun. But at the  same time, do not douse the light and dig  deeper into  
the abyss, in an attempt to spiral lower, darker, into your gloomy soul. Laruelle's human is one who opens its eyes in the night, not to look or 
speculate but to know.We are this night. "The night is this human, the human who does not 
speculate about man. Who am I, me who is? I am neither this reason nor this way of thinking, neither this question nor this speculation. I am this 
night. . . ."32

    150 26/08/2014   5:06:17 PM

e i g h t
Art and Utopia

In  the  early  "##,s  Laruelle  wrote  an  essay  on  the  artist  James  Turrell titled "A Light Odyssey: The Discovery of Light as a Theoretical and Aesthetic  Problem."1  Although  it  brie(y  mentions  Turrell's  Roden  Crater and is cognizant of his other work, the essay focuses on a series of twenty 
aquatint etchings made by Turrell called First Light ("#%#- #,). Designed to stand alone as !ne art prints, First Light nevertheless acts as a kind of 
backward glance revisiting and meditating on earlier corner light projec-tions made by Turrell in the late "#$,s, in particular works like Afrum- 
Pronto ("#$+).For  the  exhibition  of  First  Light  at  the  Museum  of  Modern  Art  in  
New  York  in  "##,,  "the  aquatints  [were]  arranged  in  groups  based  on  the white shape that hovers in the dense black !eld of each print. In the 
installation, with light projected onto the images, the shapes appear to glow and (oat; viewed in sequence, they seem to move. The e)ect, from 
print to print, is tracelike and mesmerizing."2"I  am  dealing  with  no  object,"  Turrell  said  in  a  lecture  a  few  years  

after producing First Light. "I am dealing with no image, because I want to avoid associative, symbolic thought . . . I am dealing with no focus or 
particular place to look. With no object, no image and no focus, what are you looking at?"

3 Indeed the object of First Light is perception itself, as 

Turrell was the first to admit.No object, no image, no focus-- no wonder Laruelle was drawn to First 

Light. It represents the very core principles of the non- standard method. For Laruelle, Turrell's art poses a basic problem. "Light makes manifest," 

:53

    153 26/08/2014   5:06:17 PM

:54  Art and Utopia
he acknowledges. "But what will manifest the light?"4 Systems of repre-sentation reveal aspects of the world to perceiving subjects; this is how 
light makes manifest. But is it possible to see light in itself, not in relation to a perceived object? Is it possible to manifest the rigorously immanent 
genericness of light itself?Laruelle's essay on Turrell makes two essential claims, one about perception and the other about light. Regarding the former, Laruelle asserts that  we  must  think  perception,  not think  about  perception.  Regarding 
the latter, Laruelle wishes to discover the non- orientable nature of light.There is a light of orientation, a philosophical light. But there is also  
a light that does not seek to orient perception along a particular set of lines. It is this second kind of orientation that intrigues Laruelle and that 
appears  in  the  work  of Turrell.  (Taking  advantage  of  a play  on  words, Laruelle sometimes labels this kind of non- standard orientation "occidental" to di)erentiate it from what he sees as the endless orientalism of philosophy.)

Laruelle explores these two essential claims by way of three di)erent themes  stemming  from  Turrell's  work:  discovery,  experimentation,  and 
identity. Just as Deleuze did in his book on the painter Francis Bacon, Laruelle  assumes from the  outset  that Turrell  and  his  art are  theoreti- 
cal  in  themselves,  that  they  are  performing  theoretical  work  as  such. Laruelle's is not a theoretical interpretation of a nontheoretical artwork; 
the work itself enacts the non- standard method. In Laruelle's view, Tur-rell himself discovered a non- phenomenological solution to the problem 

of light. Turrell "has discovered a new aesthetic (and theoretical) object: light as such, the being- light of light."

5

In an attempt to describe what he means by discovery, Laruelle draws attention to the subtle di)erences in meaning embedded in Turrell's title: 

"Turrell's title `First Light' is ambiguous and can be interpreted in two ways. In the weakest sense it means just what it means, first light, the first 
among many, its own relative position in a continuous order in which it is included. In the strong sense it means light first, all the light given at 
once, without residual or supplement, without division or `plays- of- light.'"6This  second  sense,  the  strong  sense,  is  most  appealing  to  Laruelle, 
because it indicates the identity of light as a kind of first givenness, light as raw discovery or invention without supplement. Part of Laruelle's aim 
is to move away from the conventional manner in which light appears in 

    154 26/08/2014   5:06:17 PM

  Art and Utopia  :55
philosophical  discourse,  for  example,  in  phenomenology,  which  tends  to think of light through the digital process of withdrawing and revealing.  As  we  saw  in  the  previous  chapter,  Laruelle's  light  is  thus  not  so much white but black, generically black. "The black immanence of this 
light . . .  lets  it  escape  from  all  phenomenology  stemming  from  the greco- philosophical type."

7

In order to describe the radical nature of Turrell's non- standard art, Laruelle poses a hypothetical scenario:

Imagine  a  photographer  tired  of  using  light  to  render  his  "subject"  or 
whatever other objects were before him. Imagine that this photographer 
was crazy enough to want to render the light as light. If so, this would not 
be the light from distant stars, but a light without stars, without source no 
matter how distant or hidden, a light inaccessible to the camera. Should 
the photographer abandon his technique and !nd another? Or should he 
generalize  his  technique  across  the  various  forms  of  the  darkroom,  the 
white cube, and the camera obscura in order to proliferate the angles, the 
frames,  the  perspectives,  the  openings  and  shutters  used  to  capture  (or 
perhaps to seduce) the light itself? Would he not be making, in essence, 
the kind of work that Turrell makes?8

Turrell's light is a light that doesn't come from the stars. Laruelle gives it an unusual label; he calls it a "photic materiality."

Being both non- cosmic and non- ontological, Turrell's light does not orient the viewer. Instead, according to Laruelle, Turrell's light performs 
experiments on perception and retrains perception according to alter-native logics. This mode of experimentation produces what he calls an 
"aesthetic generalization" of perception in order to unilateralize the con-ventional  prohibitions  placed  on  perception  by  philosophy.  Instead  of 
philosophy or photography setting the agenda, "light acts instead . . . like a drive that has its own `subjectivity,' or like an a priori force."

9 Turrell's 

experimental mandate, therefore, is to allow both the artist and the viewer to test perception, not to probe the limits of perception, not to mimic the 

way in which perception is normalized by philosophy, not to think about perception, but to think according to perception.

In this sense the artist and the viewer are strictly identical, allowing  for an auto- testing of perception. It is not that one party-- whether artist, 

    155 26/08/2014   5:06:17 PM

:56  Art and Utopia
viewer, or critic-- is in a privileged position to arbitrate Turrell's aesthetic experiment. Instead, all parties are identical.

This brings us to the !nal theme in Laruelle's essay on Turrell, that of identity. The  key question  for  Laruelle is  how  to  see  light itself, light's 
identity. For Laruelle the only way to answer the question is to break the vicious  cycle  of  worldly  self- manifestation.  "There  is  a  paradox  at  the 
heart of aesthetic sentiment," Laruelle remarks. "The paradox is the fol-lowing:  on  the  one  hand  light  remains  to  a  certain  degree  in  itself.  It  
does  not  lose  its  identity  in  an  object . . .  but  on  the  other  hand,  light `radiates.'"

10  There  is  no  solution  to  the  paradox,  of  course,  because  it 

belongs to the basic generative paradox fueling of all philosophy. Never-theless the paradox provides Laruelle with raw material for non- standard 

intervention. Simply unilateralize the paradox and put both light and its radiation into immanent superposition. Such a move defangs the transcendental tendencies added to light by philosophy and reveals a purely immanent light.

Given the unusual and somewhat counterintuitive nature of the non- standard universe, Laruelle is forced to speak in circumlocutions: light is 
a radiation- without- rays, or light is a  reflecting- without-  reflection. This might sound like jargon, yet Laruelle's "without" coinages are necessary 
in  order  to  designate  the  superimposition  or  unilateralization  of  the rivenness of the world. They aim to show "light discovered in its radical 
identity."11
Photography, !ction, and utopia. We spent some time in the previous chapter looking at photography in the context of light and color. Now 
let's return to photography and amplify what was already said. Laruelle's two books on photography, The Concept of Non- photography and Photo- 
Fiction: A Non- standard Aesthetics, include material written over a span of two decades.

12 Intended as companion pieces, the books pose a number  of  questions.  What  is  seen  in  a  photo?  What  is  light?  What  is  the photographic  stance?  And,  perhaps  most  enigmatic  of  all,  what  does 

Laruelle mean by !ction?"Aesthetics  was  always  a  case  of  tracing  art  within  philosophy,  and 
likewise of art understood as a lesser form of philosophy."13 For Laruelle aesthetics  involves  a  convoluted  and  somewhat  circular  interaction 

between art and the contemplation of art. Art beckons contemplation. 

    156 26/08/2014   5:06:18 PM

  Art and Utopia  :57
And  contemplation  seeks  its  art  to  behold.  Following  this  reciprocal interaction, art and philosophy co- constitute each other in terms of lack, 
for each completes the absence contained in the other: "Without art, phi-losophy  lacks  sensitivity  and  without  philosophy,  art  lacks  thought."

14 

This kind of mutual digitality or mutual distinction is part and parcel of the philosophical process. Art and philosophy are separated and reunited, 

then  policed  as  conjoined  but  distinct.  A  strange  logic  indeed,  yet  for Laruelle the logic is evident in everything from Plato's Republic to Deleuze 
and Guattari's What Is Philosophy? It is, in fact, the central logic of the standard model.

Photography is "a knowledge that doubles the World," he writes in the first of the two photography books.

15 As an aesthetic process, photography is philosophical in that it instantiates a decision to correlate a world with an image taken of the world. When photography doubles the world, 

it acts philosophically on and through the world.Admittedly  Laruelle  does  not  discuss  light  much  in  The  Concept  of 
Non- photography. But light appears in the second book, Photo- Fiction, particularly in the context of philosophical enlightenment and the (ash 
of the photographic apparatus. Laruelle uses two terms, e'clair and 9ash, to mark the subtle variations in di)erent kinds of light. Laruelle associates  e'clair  with  Greek  philosophy.  "The  (ash  [e'clair]  of  Logos,"  he  re-marks, "is the Greek model of thought."

16 He uses 9ash more commonly 

when discussing the physical apparatus of the photographic camera. Yet it would be hasty to assume that Laruelle poses the two terms in normative opposition-- e'clair bad and 9ash good-- because by the end he spec-i!es that both kinds of light are philosophical and that both need to be 
unilateralized.As  in  his  other  writings,  Laruelle  accomplishes  this  by  subjecting  
photography  to  the  non- standard  method.  He  proposes  a  principle  of aesthetic  suficientcy  and  shows  how  art  and  aesthetics  have  tradition- 
ally  been  allied  with  philosophy.  Likewise  he  describes  a  principle  of photographic  suficientcy,  indicating  how  photography  is  sufficient  to 
accommodate all possible images, at least in principle. And, in an echo  of how deconstructivists spoke of philosophy in terms of logocentrism, 
Laruelle labels photography's suficientcy a photo- centrism, and discusses how  philosophy  conceives  of  thought  itself  as  a  kind  of  photographic 
transcendental.

    157 26/08/2014   5:06:18 PM

:58  Art and Utopia

The  process  of  non- standardization  goes  by  several  names  and  is de!ned in di)erent ways. In recent writings Laruelle has begun to speak 
of the non- standard method in terms of !ction. Fiction means perfor-mance, invention, creativity, arti!ce, construction; for example, thought 
is !ctive because it fabricates (although only in an immanent and real sense).

Fiction might seem like a strange word choice for someone wishing  to  depart  from  the  endless  alternations  of  representation,  yet  Laruelle 
devises a type of !ction that is nonexpressive and nonrepresentational. Laruelle's !ction is purely immanent to itself. It is neither a !ctionalized 
version of something else, nor does it try to fabricate a !ctitious world or narrative based on real or fantastical events:

Non- standard aesthetics is creative and inventive on its own terms and in 
its own way. Non- standard aesthetics is a !ction- philosophy [philo- !ction], 
a philosophico- artistic genre that tries to produce works using only pure 
and abstract thought. It does not create concepts in parallel to works of 
art-- like that Spinozist Deleuze proposed, even though Deleuze himself 
was very close to embarking on a non- standard aesthetics.17

To subject philosophy to the non- standard method is to create a !c-tion philosophy. Likewise to subject photography to the same method 
produces a similar result. "The !ction- photo [photo- !ction] is a sort of generic  extension  or  generalization  of  the  `simple'  photo,  the  material 
photo."18As he said previously in The Concept of Non- photography, "The task of 
a rigorous thought is rather to found-- at least in principle-- an abstract theory  of  photography-- but  radically  abstract,  absolutely  non- worldly 
and non- perceptual."19This begins to reveal the way in which Laruelle's views on photography synchronize with his interest in utopia. Photography is not oriented toward a world, nor is it a question of perception. Rather, by remaining 
within itself, photography indicates a non- world of pure auto- impression. Bored  by  the  peculiarities  of  particular  photographic  images,  Laruelle 
!xates instead on the simple receptiveness to light generic to all photog-raphy. Yet receptiveness does not mean representability or indexicality. 
That  would  revert  photography  back  to  philosophy.  Instead  Laruelle 

    158 26/08/2014   5:06:18 PM

  Art and Utopia  :59
radicalizes photic receptiveness as such, focusing on the non- standard or immanent nature of the photographic image.

Rather than a return to phenomenology's notion of being in the world, Laruelle proposes what he calls "being- in- photo." By this Laruelle means 
the aspect of the photograph that remains radically immanent to itself. Such an aspect produces a kind of objectivity without representation, a 
radical objectivity, "[an] objectivity so radical that it is perhaps no longer an alienation; so horizontal that it loses all intentionality; this thought so 
blind that it sees perfectly clearly in itself; this semblance so extended that it is no longer an imitation, a tracing, an emanation, a `representation' of what is photographed."20But  the  photograph  is  not  the  only  thing  recast  as  non- standard 
immanence. So too the photographer, a philosopher who thinks photo-graphically about the world. Laruelle elaborates this aspect through what 
he calls the photographer's stance [posture]:

"Stance"-- this word means: to be rooted in oneself, to be held within one's 
own immanence, to be at one's station rather than in a position relative  
to the "motif." If there is a photographic thinking, it is first and foremost of 
the order of a test of one's naive self rather than of the decision, of auto- 
impression  rather  than  of  expression,  of  the  self- inherence  of  the  body 
rather than of being- in- the- World. A thinking that is rooted in rather than 
upon a corporeal base.21

Here is an illustration of Laruelle's theory of utopia. Yet he inverts the conventional  wisdom  on  utopia  as  a  non- place  apart  from  this  world. 
Laruelle's utopia is a non- world, yet a non- world entirely rooted in the present. Laruelle's non- world is, in fact, entirely real. Revealing his gnostic tendencies, Laruelle's non- standard real is rooted in matter, even if the standard world already lays claim to that same space. The non- standard 
method simply asserts the real in parallel with the world. Using the ter-minology from chapter . on digitality, the utopian real is a parallelism.

In Laruelle the aesthetic stance is the same as the utopian stance. In the most prosaic  sense, non- philosophy describes a kind of non- place 
where  conventional  rules  seem  not  to  apply.  To  the  layman,  the  non- philosopher  appears  to  use  complex  hypotheses  and  counterintuitive 
principles in order to journey to the shores of another universe. Yet that 

    159 26/08/2014   5:06:18 PM

:6;  Art and Utopia
doesn't quite capture it. As Laruelle says, insu"ciency is absolutely cru-cial  to  utopia:  "We  are  not  saying  one  has  to  live  according  to  a  well- 
formed  utopia. . . .  Our  solution  lies  within  an  insufficient  or  negative utopia."

22 The point is not to construct bigger and better castles in the 

sky, transcendental and sufficient for all. Rather, utopia is always !nite, generic, immanent, and real.

But  non- philosophy  is  utopian  in  a  more  rigorous  sense  as  well, because the structure of the human stance itself is the structure of utopia. 
Utopia forms a unilateral duality with human imagination; our think- ing is not correlated with the world but is a direct clone of the real. This 
begins to resemble a kind of science !ction, a !ction philosophy in which the human stance is rethought in terms of rigorous scientific axioms.

It makes sense, then, that Laruelle would call himself a science !ction philosopher.

23

Drawing music. Yet even with these discussions of light and photography as prologue, Laruelle's aesthetics remains elusive. So before moving on to 
some more general claims about realism and immanence I address Laru-elle's two essays on the little- known Hungarian artist August von Briesen, 
an emigre to Paris who worked primarily in painting, illustration, and pencil drawing.

24 Von Briesen is a particularly interesting case, because, 

despite  being  relatively  obscure,  he  attracted  the  pen  of  a  number  of other prominent thinkers in addition to Laruelle, including Michel Henry, 

who wrote a long essay on von Briesen prior to undertaking his impor-tant book on Kandinsky, and Marcelin Pleynet, the in(uential critic and 
author involved for many years with the journals Tel Quel and L'In!ni.25 The analysis of von Briesen further illustrates how Laruelle is essentially 
a thinker of utopia, and that the best way to understand Laruelle's aesthet-ics, and indeed his larger non- standard method, is as a theory of utopia.

The portion of von Briesen's corpus that interests us here is a series  of pencil drawings devoted to music (see August von Briesen, Drawing of 
Mozart's  Piano  Concerto  No.  55,  the  frontispiece  of  this  chapter).  Von Briesen's pencil drawings give graphical form to musical sounds. He had 
been drawing music his whole life, in fact, the myth holding that, at the age of seven during a musical dictation session, the young von Briesen 
"refused to transcribe the sound into notes, and transposed them instead into abstract drawings."

26

    160 26/08/2014   5:06:18 PM

  Art and Utopia  :6:

As  an  adult  in  Paris,  von  Briesen  had  a  habit  of  attending  classical music  recitals,  and  he  was  known  to  be  a  devotee  of  the  The'a^tre  des 
Champs  Elyse'es.  But  shunning  a  comfortable  seat  in  the  audience,  he would crouch deep in the orchestra pit, amidst the musicians, frantically 
drawing the music that engulfed him. By "#%, he was attending approxi-mately two hundred concerts per year, drawing passionately. He made so 
many drawings of music that it would have been impossible to keep them all. "For example in "#%, he only saved about -,,,, drawings out of the 
",,,,,  drawings  that  he  made."27  He  drew  images  of  Gustav  Mahler's Symphony No. 6, Proko!ev's Romeo and Juliet, Beethoven's Diabelli Variations, and many other works of music, both classical and modern.The drawings were typically made on small pieces of paper at approximately !fteen inches square.28 Using a pencil on plain white paper, von Briesen would inscribe the page with a series of lines, dashes, points, and 
other markings displaying a wide variation in length, line width, orien- tation, and curvature. Sometimes the repetition of hatch marks create a 
uniform texture, other times a swelling wisp of line overwhelms the page like a cloud.

Von  Briesen  was  a  "cruci!ed  listener,"  in  the  words  of  Henry;  as  a youngster during World War II he had been separated from his parents, 
and  during  the  Soviet  occupation  had  known  "all  the  terrors  of  exis-tence."

29  For  Henry,  von  Briesen's  drawings  were  not  so  much  render- 

ings  of music, but  portraits, self- portraits that bring to  light "a  certain kind of su)ering."

30 As von Briesen himself admitted, "I draw my own 

su)ering"-- in fact he considered all art to originate from su)ering: "#,= su)ering and ",= joy. No, $@A is too much, $A!"

31

Because the music possessed him  so  thoroughly, von Briesen never simply drew with one hand, but with both hands  at once. As  Laruelle 

describes it, "The left hand acts as a kind of device with two feet that glides over the paper, giving direction, and above all changes in direction, to the other hand."32 At the same time the right hand, the writing hand, acts like the "point at the end of a cone," funneling and focusing 

the music from out of the air:

It's this strange device (the page, the two hands with their di)erent roles, 
lengthened by pencils, the !ngers with an extended power) that captures 
and immediately redistributes the surrounding forces that are both musical 

    161 26/08/2014   5:06:18 PM

:6!  Art and Utopia

and  pictorial,  or  rather  neither  entirely  musical  nor  entirely  pictorial.  
A complex device, it registers variations more than things, di)erent line 
widths, di)erent rhythm, the changing  gradients  of a  curve  rather  than 
simply its contour.33

As Henry recounts, von Briesen would stare o) into the distance or close his eyes entirely while drawing, "meaning that each graphical mark 
made on the paper is totally independent of the marks made around it-- whether above or below, the marks are indi)erent to their neighbors."

34

In  his  analysis  of  the  artist's  drawings,  Marcelin  Pleynet  compares  von Briesen's method to the literary technique of automatic writing that 

itself had in(uenced surrealist and abstract expressionist painting. Yet at the same time Pleynet stresses that such an "automatic" method does not 
mean mere transcription. Von Briesen is not simply a conduit who hears music and then marks it down in notational form, like a secretary taking 
dictation in shorthand. Instead, von Briesen's drawings reveal "a common current of intelligence and  sensibility" that Pleynet  calls a "syncretism 
between drawing and music."35Laruelle too described von Briesen's technique in terms of automatic 
inscription: "To put it in more exact language, we can say that the auto-maton is not lacking conscious thought, and certainly at times it can be 
extremely lucid, but its consciousness concentrates and focuses itself out into the moving points of the !ngers and pencils. . . . The automaton is 
an explorer who is both blind and deaf."36 The orchestra pit itself func-tions as a kind of black box, a music box for blackness, and von Briesen 
takes his seat inside the black box rather than poking and peering at the box from the outside.

37

Nevertheless Pleynet's description of von Briesen's project in terms of what he calls "correspondences" would likely be too devoutly philosophical for Laruelle's taste. "There is no syncretism in this art work," Laruelle argues,  contradicting  Pleynet,  "only  a  prodigious  synthetic  force."

38  So 

although Laruelle uses the term automatic, he does not mean a kind of neosurrealist technique in which the hand and stylus become a conduit 

for subhuman (ows. Rather he evokes the notion of automatic drawing as a way to suspend or collapse the notion, borrowed from phenomenology, 
of the perceptual distance between artist and object. "Von Briesen wants to cancel the distance entailed in consciousness or  reflection, that is, any 

    162 26/08/2014   5:06:18 PM

  Art and Utopia  :63
kind of hesitation or imprecision that might insinuate itself between the music and its rearticulation in drawing."

39 This is where the seer and the 

blind  man  fuse  in  common:  neither  see  mere  reality,  but  both  have  a direct sense of the real.

The  placement  of the  listener  is  thus of utmost importance for von Briesen. Both Laruelle and Henry comment on it. Von Briesen locates 
himself in the orchestra pit, but his placing, as a listener and as an artist, is more complicated than simply breaking the fourth wall or trying to 
merge with the musicians themselves. Collapsing the distance between artist and object, or between the eye and the hand, means that the normal  focal  orientation  of  art  will  also  necessarily  change.  The  frame  of  the page ceases to be a window or a door, but rather "an in!nite depth, a 
galactic expanse" that obeys new laws of depth, relation, and spatiality.40 The key is found in the gesture of drawing itself, or what Laruelle calls 

the "registration" of a line:

To draw is no longer to follow the !nite outline of a thing or the in!nite 
curve of an Idea that resists its  own manifestation. To draw is  merely a 
registration:  like  a  seismograph  scratching  out  its  uncountable  jolts  and 
undulations, or like an encephalogram torn up into a kaleidoscope of little 
pieces. . . . To register means to manifest as a whole, with the expectation 
that it would be without remainder, the real itself, in this case music.41

As an aesthetic practice, automatic registration is not passive or mechan-ical; the simile of the seismograph here is not meant to evoke a passive, 
merely  technical  transcription  of  a  signal  coming  from  somewhere  else. Von Briesen is not a translator or chronicler of the world around 
him. Registration means that the sufficient potency of the world is sus-pended, not that of the artist (someone who never had any such potency 

to begin with).Laruelle  doesn't  much  deploy  the  non- philosophical  vocabulary  in 
the essays on von Briesen because in "#%0 he hadn't entirely invented it yet. But it would be keeping within the overall thrust of his analysis to 
describe  a  principle  of  sufficient  art,  in  which  the  musical  sources  lay absolute claim to the inspiration of the listening artist. This is precisely 
what concerts halls are meant to do: evoke feeling, energy, fear, pity, and other aesthetic sensations in the listener. The art source is that thing that 

    163 26/08/2014   5:06:18 PM

:64  Art and Utopia
is sufficient in all instances to lay claim to the aesthetic relation. And of course  the  surrealists'  automatic  writing  and  its  derivative  techniques, 
from the repetitive and blank descriptions of the nouveau roman to the wanderings of psychogeography, are marching in lock step with the principle of sufficient art.42Hence, the references to automatic registration must be understood 
not as a desubjecti!cation or depotentialization of the artist, much less any  kind  of  nihilist  or  modernist  profanation  of  the  human,  but  as  a 
diminution of the power of the aesthetic. Registration a` la seismograph is merely a kind of surface symptom for a combined music- drawing, fused 
in unilateral duality and neutered of its own philosophical potency.43For Henry, the kind of abstraction evident in von Briesen has nothing 
to do with normal  modes of abstract art, instead  von Briesen displays  a form of abstraction that, "issuing from the unrepresentable Ground of 
being without form, object, or world, is capable of reproducing a more universal structure of pathos."

44 Such a "generality" or "perfect indi)erence" of music is the key to von Briesen's special form of abstraction.45But  before  continuing  with  von  Briesen  and  (eshing  out  Laruelle's 

ambitions  for  the  work,  we  pause  for  a  moment  to  address  the  larger context of aesthetic theory. For there exists in Laruelle an original conception of art that withdraws from the standard model of aesthetics and posits a parallel logic of relation, perception, and sense.

Thesis XI: Laruelle's aesthetics are an aesthetics without representation, that is,  an aesthetics of  the immanent rather than  the transcendental.  
If we are to consider aesthetics strictly from a theoretical point of view, the twentieth century witnessed a single great death and transformation, 
the death of representation and its transformation into a new form. Such a  transformation  has  appeared  under  a  number  of  di)erent  names  in 
recent years: the end of critique, the crisis of mimesis, the postherme-neutic turn, the new materialism, or the end of representation.

46 But the 

seeds of this contemporary phenomenon were planted much earlier.To  be  sure,  the  question  of  nonrepresentationalism  in  art  (namely, 

abstraction) has been around for some time, yet the question of nonrep-resentational aesthetics is something quite di)erent. For even nonrepresentational art contains a sensual element that it reveals to a solicitous viewer,  no  matter  whether  that  sensual  element  has  a  referent  in  the 

    164 26/08/2014   5:06:18 PM

  Art and Utopia  :65
world. Abstraction can still be mimetic even if it isn't a picture of nature. Nonrepresentational aesthetics is something else altogether; it abandons 
the age- old question of reference (or indexicality, to use current parlance), but so too abandons the this- that structure of representation in its entirety, 
reducing aesthetics to a form of fused immanence.From Plato's hypomnemata to McLuhan's extensions of man, much of 

aesthetic theory is essentially metaphysical. Much aesthetic theory tends to posit a baseline relation between an entity and its disclosure to another 
entity. Even the most sophisticated post- structuralist positions will agree on the essential relation, that entities will form relations of di)erence with 
other entities (self with other, integral entities with heterogenous entities, and so on). In short, much of aesthetic theory conforms to the media 
principle-- the communicational is real and the real is communicational-- and the descriptions of the standard model o)ered already in the opening chapters.But starting in the "#+,s and '%,s a shift in aesthetic theory becomes 
evident, first with Deleuze but then quickly afterward with Henry and Laruelle. Something changed in France very rapidly in "#%, and "#%"; by 
"#%0 it was already complete. To be sure, immanence is a perennial theme in art theory.

47 And the relationship between realism and art is a complex 

topic in its own right, complicated by the many di)erent meanings of the term realism.

48 But in general the prevailing aesthetic theory in France at 

the time was resolutely irreal, and tended to favor non- immanent episte-mological frameworks such as hermeneutics, representation, referentiality, authenticity, and so on. Art theory from Sollers or Barthes or Debord was a question of semiotics, or textuality, or perhaps even the dialectic. 
The coin of the realm was interpretation, demysti!cation, ideology, or spectacle. Art theory at the time was not a question of thermodynamic 
energy transfer, as it would be in Deleuze's realist aesthetics, or the depic-tion of the immanence of an internal spirit as in Henry, or the art of an 
insufficient and generic ontology of the one as in Laruelle.Undoubtedly Deleuze accomplished it first in the early "#%,s. References  to  art,  literature,  and  aesthetics  permeate  nearly  all  of  Deleuze's writings. Yet with his important "#+0 collaboration with Guattari on the 
literature of Franz Kafka and then later with subsequent books published in the "#%,s, Deleuze deals with aesthetic themes in a more systematic 
way, first with painting, then with cinema, and the Baroque. Henry and 

    165 26/08/2014   5:06:18 PM

:66  Art and Utopia
Laruelle followed soon after: their respective essays on von Briesen ("#%0), Henry's book on Kandinsky in "#%%,

49 and a trail of other pieces by Laruelle 

since the mid- "#%,s.All of these writings have something in common: they all !rmly reject 

what was then the reigning techniques of semiotic and post- structuralist interpretation of art in favor of an aesthetics rooted in immanence and 
strong nonrepresentationalism. Where many of their compatriots con-sidered art an essentially epistemological pursuit, Deleuze, Laruelle, and 
Henry placed art !rmly in the category of ontology. Where others hag-gled over the details of interpretation, meaning, and form, they took up 
the questions of expression, a)ect, and immanence.50As we saw in the previous chapter, Heidegger poses a basic question 
for aesthetics. What is the relationship between hermeneutics and imma-nence? Many who have written on Heidegger have explicitly or implicitly 
taken a position on these two terms. There are those who claim adamantly that  Heidegger  is  the  consummate  thinker  of  hermeneutics,  for  in  his 
version  of  phenomenology  we  are  continually  grappling  with  a  world that is only partially knowable at best, continually withdrawing from our 
being, remaining forever at a distance, a cryptographic world that is only tolerable through a kind of mystical submission to its sublimity. And, in 
many ways, this is the prevailing view. Yet there are others who cham-pion the poetic Heidegger and hold him aloft as proof of an immediate 
relationship to truth. This is Heidegger as a philosopher of sincerity and authenticity, the romantic Heidegger who places humankind at the center of a world and asks it to stretch out its arms in order to remain within the world. Indeed part of the appeal of reading Heidegger, and a partial 
explanation for his enormous legacy, is due to the fact that he does not clearly adjudicate the question of hermeneutics and immanence.

Yet the aesthetic question takes a di)erent form in Deleuze. If Heideg-ger queries after the relationship between hermeneutics and immanence, 
Deleuze asks a di)erent question: What is the relationship between im- manence and multiplicity? In fact Deleuze considers both terms at the 
same time. There is the Deleuze of immanence as well as the Deleuze of multiplicity. For him the two components !t nicely together. Guided by 
the principle of univocity, Deleuze describes a world of pure multiplic- ity in which all multiplicities are equally immanent within nature. Thus 
there is no sender- receiver logic in Deleuze's theory of expression, only 

    166 26/08/2014   5:06:18 PM

  Art and Utopia  :67
immanent transformations within a set of virtualities. Likewise there are no entities per se in Deleuze. But just as Whitehead spoke of "occasions," 
Deleuze  describes  specific  gatherings  of  heterogeneous  multiplicities, dubbed "assemblages," that occasion themselves as blips of singularity on 
an otherwise smooth plane.So on the one hand Heidegger is forever locked in the heroic throes of 
hermeneutics, which, though ultimately shackled to the basic phenom-enological contract, also cherish immanence as some sort of ideal (even 
if it be unattainable both practically and theoretically). But on the other hand Deleuze breaks de!nitively with the legacy of phenomenology, pursuing instead the great compromise between immanence and multiplic-ity, forging an alliance between univocity and di)erence.

In other words, the twentieth century o)ers two basic options for any aesthetic theory: either Heidegger or Deleuze, either aesthetics as representational correspondence or aesthetics as nonrepresentational expres-sion. Henry and Laruelle appear in the shadow of Deleuze, in the shadow 
of the nonrepresentational night to which he introduced them.Yet  to  pose  the  choice as  that between Heidegger  or Deleuze  is  not 
merely to evoke their respective aesthetic theories, or at least not entirely. Any  Deleuzian  will  tell  you  that  the  books  on  cinema  or  painting  are 
merely the most convenient volumes, but certainly not the first and last, for gaining an understanding of his philosophy of time, movement, and 
image. And likewise Heidegger's many writings on art only feed into his account  of  Being  in  general,  an  account  of  Being  so  "poetic"  that  one 
hears Ho"lderlin wafting between the lines of the most hard- nosed pas-sages on pure ontology, perhaps even more so than the essays explicitly 
about art, such as "What Are Poets For?" or ". . . Poetically Man Dwells. . . ."51Deleuze was not the first to consider the topic of immanence, of course, 
not even the first to think aesthetics as immanence. And neither Henry nor Laruelle was  merely mimicking  the  course  taken  by  Deleuze. The 
three do not agree on what form immanence should take. But they do agree that representation is bankrupt, that the transcendental must give 
way to immanence, that aesthetics must cease to ape the logic of meta-physics, that the universe is not digital at its core. Instead they suggest 
that aesthetics follow a more mundane logic. For Henry it is the internal logic of spirit. For Deleuze it is the productive capacity of matter. And  
for Laruelle it is the immanent and generic logic of the real.52 Because of 

    167 26/08/2014   5:06:18 PM

:68  Art and Utopia
this, Deleuze, Henry, and Laruelle are the three key theorists of aesthetic immanence today.

Still,  Deleuze  does  not  fully  embrace  immanence,  at  least  judged against Laruelle's strict requirements. And on this point Laruelle refuses 
to compromise. Any form of immanence worth the name would have to reject di)erence entirely. Any true form of immanence would, in fact, be 
forged from identity rather than alterity, commonality rather than di)er-ence. This is the secret to Laruelle's nonrepresentational aesthetics. And 
to avoid confusing it with Deleuze, we call it by its proper name, a non- standard aesthetics.

A  realism  for  art:  from  weak  immanence  to  strong  immanence.  Let's return now to von Briesen and generalize slightly from the particularities of gesture, tone, rhythm, or line and think more broadly about the principles  necessary  for  a  non- standard  aesthetics.  Although  his  language would change in later work, we cede now to Laruelle's own vocab-ulary  from  "#%0,  and  consider  three  concepts:  di)erence,  reversibility, 
and truth.|| Di#erence. Although those already cognizant of Laruelle will likely 
be jarred or confused by it, Laruelle indeed uses the term di#erence in his description  of  von  Briesen.  "The  notion  of  `di)erence,'"  Laruelle  suggests, "allows us to evaluate in a precise way the originality, or rather the singularity, of von Briesen"; or, as he says later, "von Briesen is the in- 
ventor, in the philosophical and aesthetic domain, of what we will call Musico- graphical Di#erence."

53 Given Laruelle's treatment of the concept 

of  di)erence  in  Philosophies  of  Di#erence, which was  published  only  a year after the von Briesen essays, it seems confusing that he would speak 

here  of  di)erence in  positive  terms.  A  few  points  might  elucidate  this potential confusion. Beyond the rather banal biographical fact that this 
is still relatively early in the evolution of Laruelle's own non- philosophical vocabulary,  we  note  the  two  very  di)erent  lineages  available  in  this 
period  for  the  concept of di)erence:  the  Derridean  di)erence  and  the Deleuzian  di)erence.  The  two  have  almost  nothing  in  common,  and 
Laruelle is almost certainly exploring the latter, even if he is not entirely adopting it. Derrida's di)erence means supplement, deferral, or alterity. 
Deleuze's concept of di)erence-- resolutely not Derridean, deconstruc- tiv ist, or even post- structuralist-- is "a pure di)erence . . . a concept of 

    168 26/08/2014   5:06:18 PM

  Art and Utopia  :69
di)erence without negation."54 Laruelle is picking up the trail from Deleuze, only extending it. Laruelle's di)erence means unilateral superposition of 
two fused terms, that is, di)erence as an "indivisible relation between two terms in which one-- here drawing-- is the relation itself."

55 Admittedly 

Laruelle's language is not yet fully honed in this early text, yet the same logic is evident here that would eventually be described in terms of cloning and unilateral duality. Drawing is the unilateral clone of a "suspended" or nonmimetic relation between drawing and music. Laruelle is therefore attempting to unilateralize di)erence in his essays on von Briesen, and-- again perhaps parroting Deleuze at some level-- to abduct it from 

its philosophical origins, calling di)erence "a veritable synthesis that is real and non- imaginary."

56

|| Reversibility/Irreversibility. Von Briesen does not create an "equiva-lence" or "exchange" between music and graphical art, but "what certain 

contemporary thinkers in(uenced by Nietzsche refer to as a `reversibil-ity'-- in  this  case  between  the  musical  and  graphical."

57  Von  Briesen's 

synthesis of music and drawing is not a synthesis in the Hegelian sense, a  mutual  encounter  and  cancelation  of  two  antonyms  elevated  into  a 

higher form. "This is not a making equivalent or a translation from one into the other"; rather, von Briesen shows that there is an "irreducibility 
of the graphical, and reciprocally too [an irreducibility of the musical]."58 Thus, when allowed to be absolutely reversible to each other, music and 

drawing in fact become irreducible  or irreversible. In other words, the secret to a non- standard conception of di)erence is found in the elimination of any kind of logic of exchange, correspondence, supplementar-ity, trace, or remainder. In his later writings, he ups the ante even further 
and, for what he quite permissively labels "reversibility" here, begins to speak more militantly in terms of irreversibility alone. But the two concepts,  though  ostensibly  antonyms,  should  be  understood  in  a  similar sense: irreversibility is merely the more rigorous conception of what is 
here  described  as  an  endless  reversibility.  Within  this  kind  of  hyper- reversibility, representation's circuit of exchange-- music represented as 
drawing,  or  drawing  represented  as  music-- is  invalidated.  The  "strict reversibility" of music and drawing means, albeit somewhat counterintuitively, that the two elements are superimposed on each other and irre-ducible one to the other. So though in his later work Laruelle calls such 
logic an "irreversible duality," here in "#%0 his language is still evolving 

    169 26/08/2014   5:06:18 PM

:7;  Art and Utopia
and he speaks instead of a kind of suspended or metastable "reversibility." Whichever word, though, the point is ultimately the same.

|| Truth (as Fusion, Superposition, or Metastability). "What is he draw-ing?"  Laruelle  asks  of  von  Briesen-- and  the  answer  is  simple:  "Truth 
itself."59  Von  Briesen  is  looking  for  an  aesthetic  criteria  of  truth,  not  simply  of  technicity,  resemblance,  etc.  "In  the  last  instance,  the  object  

of art is truth."60 But what does this mean? Although truth is not a par-ticularly  important  category  in  Laruelle,  as  it  is  for,  say,  Heidegger  or 
Badiou,  the  use  of  the  term  here  signi!es  a  !nite  or  fused  relation  of  pure immanence. In short, truth means the one. Using the logic of difference  and  reversibility,  and  extending  and  radicalizing  them  to  an almost unidenti!able degree, an aesthetics of truth is one with a direct 
and  immediate  image  of  the  real.  Hence  von  Briesen's  drawings  are directly in the real of the music (because they are that musico- graphical 
relation itself, that in itself). "Von Briesen's secret goal is to show how every graphical phenomenon immediately represents a musical phenomenon, itself given over to another graphical phenomenon-- and recipro-cally as well."

61 This is a "suspension" or "short circuit" of the typical cycle 

of  art  in  which  composers  create  the  music  and  listeners  appreciate, experience,  or  interpret  it.  Von  Briesen  is  not  representing  or  signify- 

ing a truth that's in the music. Instead, von Briesen proves that there can be  a  "circularity  of  interpretation"  in  which  drawing  interprets  music 
and  music  interprets  drawing.62  Thus  the  essence  of  the  work  resides  in  what  Laruelle  previously  termed  "Musico- graphical  Di#erence,  that  
is, in the tension of forces that are always both musical and graphical."63 It's  the reversibility of music and drawing that ensures that truth does 
not concentrate itself in one side or the other-- because that would sim-ply be a return to the classical conception of truth as philosophical suf!ciency.  Rather,  through  a  logic  of  metastability  or  superposition,  the truth of art is realized through the perpetual withdrawal or virtualization of truth.Through such techniques-- hyper- di)erence, irreversibility, and truth 
as  superposition-- we  arrive  at  an  image  of  Laruelle's  non- standard  aesthetics. His aesthetic theory is not so much the weak immanence of 
phenomenology or even the immanence of Deleuzianism, but a strong theory of immanence entirely devoid, at least according to Laruelle, of 
any kind of philosophical or metaphysical residue.

    170 26/08/2014   5:06:18 PM

  Art and Utopia  :7:

As such it deviates from the modern tradition of aesthetic theory, ini-tiated by Kant and continuing through all manner of varying and often 
incompatible permutations, from romanticism and modernism to post-modernism  and  beyond.  Von  Briesen  forces  us  to  reconsider  Kantian 
aesthetic  theory,  radicalizing  and  unilateralizing  the  classic  notions  of "judgment  without  concept"  and  "!nality  without  end,"  formulations 
that seem practically non- philosophical already despite their metaphysi-cal core. As Laruelle puts it,

These kinds of romantic theories founded on imagination mark the beginning of the modern and nihilist degradation of art, that is, an aesthetic 
shift founded on the principle of a successive privation or destruction of 
the codes of representation in its classical sense: start with the free play of 
the imagination, an art "without concept," and end up with a kind of painting without painting, without canvas, without color, etc. . . . Von Briesen 
reverses kantian aesthetics; he only dispenses with the objects of perception and the techniques of classical representation, the "concept" and the 
"end," in order to rea*rm the ideal play of art as such-- in other words 
(and to repeat) of truth as such.64

Von Briesen's drawings are, in this way, not exactly abstraction, nor are they modernist, and  they  certainly have  nothing to  do with the  tradi- 
tion of modern nihilism.65 "Von Briesen's work a priori invalidates this entire critical and aesthetic apparatus."

66 Instead-- and here the in(uence 

of Henry is clear-- Laruelle describes a "recurrent force" that relies upon an "identity" or an "aesthetic common sense, a faculty of the imagination 

that limits or hampers radically the notorious `free play' of representa-tions."

67 This "common art" or "generic art" is the necessary outcome of 

a realist aesthetics. In fact, the only kind of art possible for non- standard philosophy would be a common (namely, generic) art.

In the wake of this discussion, and to summarize what is meant by a "realist," "immanent," or "non- standard" aesthetics, we might recapitulate a number of points culled from both this chapter and the previous one. First, light and the alternations of light and dark are central to the 
standard model of philosophy. Thus the previous chapter was devoted, in part, to an exploration of light and dark as immanent (not philosophical) phenomena. This led to the work of James Turrell and the notion 

    171 26/08/2014   5:06:18 PM

:7!  Art and Utopia
that light might be approached as such, not merely as a means of illumi-nation  or  a  vehicle  for  something  else.  A  pure  black-- or  alternately  a 
pure  bright-- produces  a  crypto-   or  non- standard  ontology  in  which nothing is philosophically revealed to anything else. Laruelle labels this 
a "uchromia," a non- color or color utopia.In both this chapter and the previous one we also discussed photography  as  a  typical,  albeit  not  special,  non- standard  art  form.  Like  von Briesen's own drawing technique, the photographic apparatus inscribes 
the real automatically and "mechanically" and thus directly enacts the unilaterial duality of the one. This led to a discussion of von Briesen in 
terms of an "aesthetics without representation," that is, a superposition of music and drawing into a suspended or noncommunicative relation. 
This is the last and most important detail of the entire discussion. The "non- musical aspect of all music" is an a- synthetic relation between two 
things, a relation without a synthesis.68 Laruelle's aesthetics is based on  a unilaterial logic in which two terms are subsumed not by a third, but 

by  the  one  term.  In  other  words,  the  two  terms  and  the  relation  are immanent to the one term (with the second term as the unilaterial clone 
of  the  one).  This  is,  in  essence,  Laruelle's  single  greatest  discovery  as  a thinker: a new concept of relation that is neither dialectical nor di#erential; 
a relation that is not digital.69
"There are no great utopian texts after the widespread introduction of computers,"  Fredric  Jameson  remarked  recently,  "the  last  being  Ernest 
Callenbach's Ecotopia of "#+0, where computers are not yet in service."70"#+0 was a year of crisis. Saigon had fallen that spring, marking the 
end of the war in Vietnam. A few years prior, OPEC's oil embargo had sent price shocks  around the  world. The boom  years of  the  "#0,s and 
'$,s had given way to new economic crises by the early to mid- "#+,s. And these crises would, in part, usher in a new economic regime that 
would place the digital computer at the heart of value production.It was the time of waning modernity. In Jameson's estimation, it was 
the  last  time  one  might  propose  a  kind  of  non- place  apart  from  this world, a utopia in which alternative axioms generated alternative worlds. 
Indeed, the  years  since have  been  marked  by  a failure  of imagination, particularly among progressives, during which it has become impossible 
to conceive of viable alternatives to the new cybernetic universe.

    172 26/08/2014   5:06:19 PM

  Art and Utopia  :73

Today, instead of utopian texts,
we  have  the  free- market  deliria  of  cyberpunk,  which  assumes  that cap- 
italism is itself a kind of utopia of di)erence and variety. I think this fail- 
ure  of  imagination  on  the  left can  be  attributed  to  the  assumption  that 
computers are enough to "take care" of totalization: that the well- nigh in!-
nite  complexities  of  production  on  a  global  scale,  which  the  mind  can 
scarcely  accom modate,  are  mysteriously . . .  resolvable  inside  the  computer's black box and thus no longer need to be dealt with conceptually  
or representationally.71

The end of the utopian text thus signals for Jameson an end to rep- resentation.  Or at least it indicates that  representation, as  complicated  
or (awed as it might be under otherwise normal conditions, has been interrupted  and  outsourced  to  another  domain  entirely  (digitality  and 
computation).Does Laruelle contradict Jameson's argument, the argument that no 
great utopian texts exist after digital machines enter everyday life? Not  at all, it rati!es it all the more. Laruelle's work con!rms a particular kind 
of  historical  periodization:  formerly  existing  as  narrative  or  world  or image, utopia perished by the end of the "#+,s; but, where it perished as 
narrative, it was reborn as method. Such is the key to Laruelle's utopia-nism. For him utopia is a technique, not a story or a world.

Utopia  means  simply  to  decline  to  participate  in  the  philosophical decision, to decline the creation of worlds. Counterintuitively then, Laruelle's  refusal  to  create  alternative  worlds  is  what  makes  him  a  utopian thinker, for his non- standard world is really a non- world-- just as utopia 
is de!ned as "non- place." To abstain from the philosophical decision is to abstain from the world. And thus to discover the non- standard universe is to discover the non- place of utopia. (Or, using the parlance of media aesthetics: the pre- "#+,s utopia is a diegetic or worldbound utopia, 
but the Laruellean utopia is a non- diegetic or non- worldbound utopia.)Cold  comfort  for  Jameson  however,  because  Laruelle's  marginality 
today-- his recent exposure in the Anglophone world a burst of visibility after thirty- plus years laboring in obscurity-- is but further evidence of 
the marginality of utopian thinking. Indeed the chief di*culty lies in the fact that a "utopia of di)erence and variety" is no longer the goal, ever 

    173 26/08/2014   5:06:19 PM

:74  Art and Utopia
since big business has become so adept at selling these many di)erent and varying worlds. When di)erence enters the mode of production, as 
it has under post- Fordism, it is no longer possible to conceive of utopia as di)erence. Rather, the chief challenge for utopian thinking today is to 
force the generic condition in the here and now, a utopia not of another place, but of an impoverished and !nite common real. Such is the task of 
the two remaining chapters.

    174 26/08/2014   5:06:19 PM

n i n e
Ethics

From su"cient subjectivity to insu"cient personhood. Rekindling a theme that had occupied his writing for several years, Laruelle's recent book A 
General Theory of the Victim addresses the question of victims and vic-timhood, from slavery to the Holocaust, from the persecution of Christ 
on the cross to modern genocides and crimes against humanity.1 In the book Laruelle elaborates a theory of the victim, rooting it in a generic 
humanity, with the ultimate goal of freeing the victim from a received dogma that would bind it within an endless persecution.

While admittedly dissimilar in both its method and outcomes, Laru-elle's  book  treads  the  same  terrain  encountered  in  Hegel's  famous  dis- 
cussion of the master- slave dialectic, or even Frantz Fanon's treatment  of alterity and violence in The Wretched of the Earth. The central question is crime and punishment, the powerful and the powerless, violence and  victimization.  Yet  Laruelle  refuses  to  approach  the  question  from 
the perspective of tyranny, in an attempt to defang the powerful or some-how to use the master's tools to bring down the master's house. Likewise 
he refuses to admit that the dialectic itself exists. Neither the powerful nor the power structure itself are determining for Laruelle.

As  with the  biblical  prophecy that  the  meek  shall  inherit the  earth, Laruelle  instead  argues  that  the  true  ethical  position  for  humanity  is 
something like a "generalized meek" or, in the language of this book, a generalized victim. We are all, therefore, at the level of real lived experience, fragile victims in the most generic sense. Such a discovery is the 

:77

    177 26/08/2014   5:06:19 PM

:78  Ethics
only way that, according to Laruelle, humanity will be able to exit the vicious circle of dialectical power relations (as with the master and slave 
locked in endless struggle) and enter into a condition of generic human ethics.

2

The central villain of the book is the intellectual. Laruelle particularly scorns those media- savvy liberal intellectuals who hawk their punditry 

from talk show to newspaper column, all those talking heads who like to comment on the important matters of the day. These are intellectuals in 
the Sartrean mold, often labeled "engaged" or "committed" intellectuals. At times Laruelle also calls them "embedded" intellectuals, adopting the 
English word and leaving it untranslated in that way the French do when they want to !rewall what they see as suspicious phenomena encroaching from overseas:

Media- savvy, engaged or embedded intellectuals are those who use media 
and invest themselves there-- from the oldest kinds (the book, printed media) 
right up to the most innovative and revolutionary, and under the sway of 
that most emblematic medium, philosophy itself-- to expose the image of 
the victim, for example Voltaire and Zola, not simply the current fringe  
of tele- intellectuals who represent the low water mark. (%.- %/)

These kinds of intellectuals are odious to Laruelle because they par-ticipate in a division of the world, even as they claim to sympathize with 
the victims they represent. On the one hand, they participate in a divi-sion between (") the real historical victim and (-) the abstract juridical 
concept of the "rights of man" (%#). Intellectuals swoop into the divide, playing the role of middle management between these two layers, real 
and abstract. On the other hand, they endorse a kind of division of labor between victims and intellectuals. One party does the labor of su)ering, 
while the other party carries the burden of going on television and talk-ing about it.

The outcome is overexposure. "I call overrepresentation or overexpo-sure  the  kind  of  visibility  cast  over  victims  by  mediatic  thought,  itself 
deeply in(uenced by the spirit of philosophy" (#-). Victims are overex-posed when they are allowed to circulate purely as images, granted more 
media coverage in the bargain, to be sure, but ultimately silenced in that mute !xity that is the special signature of representation.

    178 26/08/2014   5:06:19 PM

  Ethics  :79

The larger critique of philosophy and digitality is clear: just as philo s-ophy's problems ultimately stem from its reliance on a baseline representational structure, labeled here the "media principle," so too the victim is laundered through the endless numbing aftershocks of media representation. Rubbing salt in the wound, the victim is violated and abused a second time over when it is presented anew in the mass media.

Rather than pursuing a course of engagement with crises, or trying to become embedded with the victim, Laruelle suggests a slight deviation 
into a parallel world. Instead of engaged intellectuals, Laruelle proposes generic intellectuals. Such generic intellectuals "are put under the condition of humanity," he writes, "rather than put in service to the `values' and `ends' of philosophy" (%/). Similar in spirit to Gramsci's concept of the 
organic intellectual, or Benjamin's call, in the in(uential essay "Author  as Producer," for the intellectual to merge directly with the mode of production,  Laruelle's  generic  intellectuals  are  put under  the  condition  of humanity, meaning they fuse directly with mankind in the most general 
sense. These intellectuals are not "overdetermined" by any given set of specific political positions-- pro- labor, pro- choice, or whatnot-- but rather 
de- individuate into the insuficientcy of generic conditions. They are in this sense "underdetermined" rather than overdetermined (%/). Laruelle's 
is a radical particularity; all persons can only be understood "in person." There are no victims in the abstract, only you and me and everyone else.

Hence the most important coinage in the book, the victim- in- person. Television might show victimized individuals and survivors, overexposing and circulating their images endlessly. But if one should withdraw and  cease  to  participate  in  these  kinds  of  circuses,  one  will  discover  
a  non representational  victim,  the  "real"  victim  if  you  will.  This  is  the victim- in- person.

Where  victims  are  individuated  and  tagged  with  certain  classi!ca-tions (via various biopolitical stigma, HIV status, citizenship status, and 
so on), the victim- in- person withdraws from such classi!cation schemes, remaining  generic,  or  "whatever  it  happens  to  be."  Where  victims  are 
trapped  by  images  and  representation,  the  victim- in- person  is  !rmly rooted in a lived reality. Where victims are overexposed, the victim- in- 
person is superpositioned. Not borne in repetition or synthesis, the victim-in- person arrives as an a- synthetic resurrection, what Laruelle elsewhere 
calls a "clone."

    179 26/08/2014   5:06:19 PM

:8;  Ethics

Being  "in  person,"  these  victims  are  thus  justly  labeled  "ordinary  messiahs" by Laruelle ("$0). They  bear  what he  calls "glorious  bodies" 
($%). But this is not to romanticize victims by associating them with a sense of heroic glory or endowing them with the miraculous powers of a 
savior.  He  merely  seeks  to  emphasis  the  curious  logic  that  underpins them. Like the unimpeachable !nality of messianic time or the fathomless gifts of heavenly glory, the victim, as the cornerstone of all humanity, announces a unidirectional and determining ultimatum: the meek shall 
inherit the earth.The proper relation to the victim is thus never pity but compassion. 
Laruelle  admits  that  his  use  of  the  word  compassion  might  sound  to some readers a bit old- fashioned if not patronizing. But the point is that 
under a regime of compassion, all su)er together equally. Hence Laruelle's is  something  of  a  "mystical  Maoism,"  if  such  a  thing  is  even  possible:  
we  are  all  generic  victims  determined  by  the  insuficientcy  of  the  one. Although it might seem that those who are not victims are still patronizing  the  victim  by  showing  compassion,  or  romanticizing  the  victim  by seeking to emulate its glorious su)ering, Laruelle insists that we are 
all  always  already  victims,  simply  by  virtue  of  being  a  part  of  generic humanity. The problem is thus not so much victimization itself, but the 
decision to digitize the world into victims and not, this being part and parcel of the philosophical gesture more generally.

3

Although not present on every page, there are two key sparring part-ners lurking deep in the text: Levinas for his work on ethics, and Badiou 

for his theory of the event. Laruelle is notoriously cagey about acknowl-edging in(uence; he typically fends o) even the closest potential allies. 
(As we have seen, Henry is perhaps the closest, and although Deleuze  is also close, his very nearness presents a grave threat that must be subdued.)  Laruelle  considers  Levinas  an  important  philosopher  of  ethics and cites him without prejudice. Yet in Laruelle's view, Levinas ultimately 
imports victimhood into philosophy and in so doing founders there.Badiou, however, earns little felicitation from Laruelle. Badiou seems 
to haunt Laruelle's recent writings more than other !gures, to vivid e)ect of course in Anti- Badiou, but also in Non- standard Philosophy and here 
in the book on victims. For Laruelle, Badiou represents all that is wrong with  philosophy. Where  Badiou argues  for  a  voluntarist  !delity  to  the 
event, Laruelle sees the event as a generic resurrection of the one. Where 

    180 26/08/2014   5:06:19 PM

  Ethics  :8:
Badiou thinks in terms of dialectics, Laruelle thinks in terms of super-position-- a term that Laruelle freely and unapologetically borrows from 
the  world  of  quantum  mechanics,  much  to  the  chagrin  of  those  who view such a move as dilettantish and pseudo- scientific.

In confronting him directly, Laruelle pokes fun at Badiou's powerful triad of body- language- truth, stated perhaps most clearly in the opening 
pages  of  Logics  of  Worlds:  there  are  only  bodies  and  languages,  except that there are truths.

4 Laruelle swaps in two di)erent terms, lived experience and algebra for Badiou's opening pair (bodies and languages). That is  to say, the real lived experience of bodies, which Laruelle prefers to  

call  "persons,"  or  people  as  they  are  experienced  "in  person,"  and  the mathematical language of formulae and identity known as algebra. But 
then, true to form, Laruelle refuses to synthesize his two terms dialecti-cally as Badiou does. Instead he holds the two terms in superposition. 
And here the quantum mechanical vocabulary begins to pay o).5But it is not simply the dialectic that Laruelle !nds distasteful in Badiou. 
The  two  thinkers  also  di)er  on  the  question  of  the  event. We  need  "a theory of the event that leans toward quantum theory," Laruelle asserts, 
"by way  of the  generic" ("0.). With  this  Laruelle  means  that  the  event should be understood more as the withholding of decision rather than 
the realization of it.Subjects  are  not  so  much  individuals  with  wills  who,  through  their 
own courage to act, convert themselves, and in so doing further de!ne themselves in relation to truth. On the contrary, the concept of "subject" 
is precisely the problem. The point is not to increase the resolution of the subject by adding more de!nitional predicates-- I am militant, I am freedom !ghter, I am lover, I am subject to truth-- but rather to de- individuate the subject, again using the concept of superposition or suspension of de!-
nition, toward a condition of generic being. (Although Laruelle seems to overlook how important the generic is in Badiou's own project.) What 
results are no longer subjects but persons, which taken together form not so much a mass or a nation but humanity.

6

Perhaps the best way to understand the di)erence between Badiou and Laruelle is to consider how the Bible and Christianity !gure in their work. 

Badiou has famously relied on Paul and the road to Damascus, the bibli-cal story of revelation and conversion. The story of Paul's conversion !ts 
Badiou's political theory because it represents a subject who experiences 

    181 26/08/2014   5:06:19 PM

:8!  Ethics
an event, the vision of Jesus, and whose life is decisively changed in alle-giance to that event. As was discussed in chapter /, Badiou's theory of the 
event requires trenchant decisions made by subjects.Laruelle's theory of the event, however, could not be more di)erent. 
Instead of rooting the event in a particular time, bound to a particular subject, Laruelle removes the event from temporal and spatial particularities,  making  it  both  radically  archaic  and  ultimately  !nal  (the  two temporal conditions that Laruelle enigmatically labels "before- the- first" 
and "in- the- last- instance").Christ therefore, not Paul, takes center stage for Laruelle. For in the 
resurrection of Christ Laruelle sees a type of event that is not dialectical and  not  bound  to  the  singular  trenchant  decisions  of  subjects.  In  this 
way resurrection, not conversion, is the driving force behind Laruelle's theory of the event. Resurrection, not conversion, is how Laruelle's political theory di)ers from that of Badiou.7Compared to the I- can- change- the- world enthusiasm of the Badiousian militant, Laruelle again appears a bit old- fashioned, even reaction-ary. For Laruelle, conversion is too incorrigibly philosophical, and the 
convert too hopelessly narcissistic. That most emblematic philosophical event, to "know thyself," is merely another kind of conversion, another 
road to Damascus. Both philosophy and religion rely too much on the lightning strike of revelation. "A material formalism modeled after quantum theory, not a philosophical materialism, is the best way to think the event," Laruelle asserts by way of an alternative. "Christ and his resurrection are not so much a miraculous event as a non- standard or non- theological one" ("0/).

Laruelle's primary ethical task is to view humanity as indivisible with-out resorting to essence or nature. The only way to do this, he suggests, 
is  to  radicalize the  generic  condition  of  humanity. The  point is  not to universalize the liberal subject, as with the "We are the world" conceits of 
Western privilege, but rather to do the opposite, to underdetermine per-sons rather than overdetermine them, to admit to a baseline insuficientcy 
of  personhood.  Or  as  he  says  in  a  (oating  epigraph  that  launches  the book, Why shouldn't the victim be the cornerstone of humanity?

What do su"ciency and insu"ciency mean in Laruelle? What does it mean when he evokes the  specter  of the principle of sufficient philo sophy, the principle of sufficient economy, or the principle of sufficient 

    182 26/08/2014   5:06:19 PM

  Ethics  :83
mathematics? All these principles of sufficient x act to invalidate the suf-!ciency of the structure they describe, whether philosophy, the economy, 
mathematics, or otherwise. Together they act like a generalized death- of- the- Father in that they render all power insufficient. In the wake of 
such a regime of insuficientcy, nothing can make a claim anymore. Noth-ing can have authority over anything else.

On  the  one  hand  we  might  label  them  his  "Anti- Fascist  Principles," e)ecting a general form of paci!sm. In essence they instruct us not to fall 
in love with power and not to assume command over the world. But on the  other  hand  these  are  all  the  many  "Principles  of  the  Meek."  They 
make philosophy ine)ective and insufficient. They neuter the authority of mathematics or aesthetics or economics.

If Badiou's universe follows the law of the generalized militant, where lovers and  artists are all  militants for truth, Laruelle's  universe  follows 
the  law  of  the  generalized  meek,  where  nothing  has  the  intention  or capacity  to  assert  itself  over  anything  or  anyone  else.  Such  meekness  
is attractive for Laruelle because it indicates an ethics. But the general-ized militant is attractive to Badiou for a di)erent reason: it indicates a 
politics.
Thesis XII. As digitization, the political is two. It forces a change from analog  to  digital, or from a generic continuum  into  a series  of points. 
Before  continuing  further  with  the  ethical,  consider  the  realm  of  the political and the way in which politics is a kind of digitization or multiplication of points. Or in shorthand: Whereas being is one, politics is two.Using what he calls the theory of points, Badiou shows how "atonal" 
or otherwise lifeless worlds, devoid of contour or intensity, may be forced into alignment around two points.

8 Newly demarcated by such points, the 

world loses its lifelessness and becomes tense or taut. The introduction of points is crucial in the transformation of the world. Lifeless worlds are 

"devoid of points," he warns. "Without a point, there's no truth, nothing but  objects,  nothing  but  bodies and  languages. . . . Everything is  organized and everything is guaranteed."9In an echo of Baudrillard's "perfect crime," Badiou bemoans the planning  and  preemption  endemic  to  contemporary  atonal  worlds.  Given that  everything  is  organized  and  guaranteed,  no  tension  may  appear,  
no  unforeseen  events,  indeed  no  events  whatsoever. Badiou's  term for 

    183 26/08/2014   5:06:19 PM

:84  Ethics
such worlds is "democratic materialism." These worlds have no life. They contain nothing but bodies and languages, nothing but objects and relations,  nothing but matter  and  form. They  are  atonal  in that they have  no musical pitch, no features to their political landscape. Badiou's "point" 
is similar to Heidegger's "project"; human experience projects forward, Heidegger  says,  and  a  human  being  should  have  a  project  in  order  to 
realize  its  special  mode  of  being.  Likewise,  for  Badiou,  life  must  have points.  Life  seeks  taut  anchors  on  which  to  moor  itself,  like  a  ship  in 
harbor that pulls on its moorage points, or when the ship sets to sea and navigates according to the celestial points.

Through these points and projects, formerly lifeless relations are re-invigorated  with  value.  When  something  is  at  stake,  the  atonal  graph 
becomes a directed graph, bound by vectors of ethico- moral force. Each pair of points is also a potential decision, each a potential digitization. 
Each pair of points,  each either/or decision, represents  a possible leap forward for the voluntarist will. With points there are no half- choices, no 
incremental slippages side to side along the continuum of mediocrity.With  Badiou  as  guide,  the  principle  of  sufficient  reason  could  be 
rewritten for the twenty- first century as for every point, a vector. Every point  is  a  point  within  a  vector  !eld  of  forces.  To  be  placed  into  a  
world is to be subject to the push and pull of force. Thus to exist in the world means  to  be  located along  a force di)erential, like a ball  placed  
at the top of an inclined plane. The forces are not irresistible, certainly, but nevertheless they exist and are entailed in the very de!nition of the 
point.Recall Deleuze's singularities and intensities, they sit at the center of  
a !eld of di)erentials. There can be no intensities without a continuous dissipation of intensity surrounding them. There can be no high- pressure 
zones without a lessening of pressure radiating away. Likewise, because Badiou's points are de!ned in contradistinction to the (at lifelessness of 
atonal existence, they require a kind of airless gap separating them. This gap  is  the  vector,  and  all  points  require  them.  Otherwise  they  would  
be planes rather than points, lines rather than locations. Thus for every point, a vector.

And so Badiou's theory of points means that there are two kinds of worlds: those that adhere to the principle of sufficient reason and those 
that do not. A tense world is one that has reason, that has cause. A (at 

    184 26/08/2014   5:06:19 PM

  Ethics  :85
world  is  without  reason,  without  cause.  Or  using  today's  terminology, tense worlds are vectored, and (at worlds are without vector.

Yet Badiou and Deleuze are ultimately incompatible regarding the con-tours of the universe. While Badiou's points are monumental and heroic, 
the will of the lover or poet forcing a decision and adhering to it, Deleuze's intensi!cations are ubiquitous but mundane. If the emblematic Badiousian  vector  is  the  vector  of  revolt,  the  emblematic  Deleuzian  vector  is  the vector of cell mitosis. Badiousian subjects are subjects to truth, but 
Deleuzian  subjects  may  include  trees,  mice,  and  rocks.  The  di)erence between Badiou and Deleuze thus appears in stark distinction. They represent two fundamentally di)erent tendencies within the ethico- political universe.

Badiou or Deleuze, principle or process. Either the militant adhesion to truth, forged from a decision that deviates from the state of the situation,  or the  ongoing,  inductive,  recombination  of  forces,  oblivious  to absolute  law  or  moral  code.  Either  an  aligned  world  injecting  tonality 
into otherwise lifeless landscapes, or an open world escaping the many micro- fascisms of the universe. In short, either Badiou's politics of the 
digital, or Deleuze's ethics of the analog. Either a politics of distinction, or an ethics of indistinction.

In  years  past  one  might  have  called  Badiou's  worlds  "moral"  and "immoral" rather than taut and atonal, but such terms  have fallen out  
of fashion today. Indeed the political is the realm of morality and law,  for  the  political  is  the  realm  in  which  actors  either  follow  norms  or  
willfully deviate from them. The realms of politics, law, and morality all follow the two- structure because they all require an elemental distinction. To engage politically, legalistically, or morally means to digitize a landscape, to divide the landscape into two. To think politically, legalistically, or morally means to organize continuity into two or more poles, thereby facilitating judgment. This is why politics often boils  down to 
the brute question of friend or foe, who is with us and who is against us.10 Likewise, both legal and moral law follow the two- structure in that they 
di)erentiate between those who follow the law and those who do not.Seen in this way, politics is digitization because it forces a change from 
a generic continuum into a series of points. But which points exactly, and who chooses them? What happens if the points are selected in such a way 
as to keep the world lifeless? Can there be a politics of selection, in which 

    185 26/08/2014   5:06:19 PM

:86  Ethics
the identi!cation of points becomes contested? Is choosing co)ee or tea a true digitization? Is the American political party system a legitimate 
digitization?Indeed, point selection is highly contested, particularly in cases when 
the points themselves are viewed to be as lifeless and atonal as the (at landscape  from  which  they  deviate.  Because  the  selection  of  points  is 
contested, the political is often concerned with the question of what con-stitutes authentic digitization, in essence superimposing on top of the old 
pair of points a new pair of points (authenticity and inauthenticity). This is why the political so frequently arrives in the form of a romanticism of 
the heart or a fascism of the body. A secondary digitization intervenes to arbitrate the failings of a previous digitization.

Philosophy divides and science unites.11 The adage is from Althusser, but Laruelle would agree wholeheartedly. And in light of the previous, an 
alliance starts to emerge between, on the one hand, philosophy, politics, and  division,  and  on  the  other, science,  ethics,  and  uni!cation.  In  the 
most elemental sense, all philosophy is a form of political philosophy, just as all science is a form of ethical science. Or, to state it in softer terms, a 
politics will tend toward a philosophy, while an ethics will tend toward a science. The reason is that politics requires decision, which is the basic 
condition of philosophy, while ethics requires indecision, which is the basic condition of science.

Thesis XIII. As virtualization, the ethical is one. It forces a change from digital to analog, or from distinction to indistinction. The political is two. 
But the ethical is one. To become political means to think the landscape in terms of twos, in terms of the two- function-- either/or, !ght or relent, 
accept or reject. But to remain ethical means the inclusion of the excluded into  a  single  fabric,  to  withdraw  from  the  tumult  of  judgment  and  to 
dwell within the scene of indivision. If the political is driven fundamen-tally by an inexplicable and overwhelming nausea, the ethical is the state 
in  which  no  kind  of  nausea  whatsoever  can  take  hold.  If  the  political aims to reveal the fundamental antagonisms of society, the ethical aims 
to unify human pathos under the banner of a common indistinction (see Ka"the Kollwitz, Fraternal Love, the frontispiece of this chapter).

"What spectacular antagonisms conceal is the unity of poverty," wrote Guy Debord.

12 Contra Badiou's theory of points, the ethical requires a 

    186 26/08/2014   5:06:19 PM

  Ethics  :87
withdrawal of points, an abdication of the force of law. Instead of a series of  legal  mechanisms,  the  ethical  revolves  around  a  single  principle  or 
hypothesis.  This  principle  could  be  Debord's  unity  of  poverty,  or  the principle of the common. It could be the Christian ethical prophecy that 
the meek shall inherit the earth, or the basic democratic ideal that those excluded from society ought to be included.

In any case, the ethical is a question of the withdrawal of the law. What replaces the law is not so much a new super- law, a new law of laws, but 
the absence of all mundane commandments in favor of a single principle of uni!cation. For this reason the ethical is best understood as a kind of 
virtualization, because it withholds decision in favor of a superposition of indistinction. And this is why, while there are many possible forms of 
political  organization, there  is only one kind of ethical  organization-- communism-- a truth promulgated by Jesus just as much as by Marx.

So ultimately the ethical means indecision. But this is not to laud the politics of apathy that plagues liberal democracies today, just as it destroyed 
the desire of the people under Stalinism. This is not a reactionary form of thought, like the reactionary pragmatism that resists points. Indecision shares nothing with the repugnant indecisiveness of nation- states and other global actors refusing to act on climate change, or Third World 
debt relief, or Mideast peace. Indecision shares nothing with that kind of cowardice and corruption, the worst kind of lifelessness, barely concealing a contempt for the world and those living within it.Indecision, by contrast, refers to the withdrawal from decision. Indecision is the ultimate analog event. It integrates the two (the three, the multiple) as one, thereby obviating the need to cut in general-- the word 
decision from caedere meaning "to cut." As radical non- cutting, indeci-sion integrates entities as one, and it does so at the level of the generic 

facticity of being. This holds for humanity, but also for the generic factic-ity that binds the human together with chimp, mouse, or microbe. Indecision binds humanity together with massively macro events like climate change, as well as micro events like the intimate mutual recognition of 
self with other, or the acts of mercy, love, and sacri!ce. Marx called it "species- being," but we might render the term even more indecisively as 
phylum- being, kingdom- being, or simply generic- being.If the political is to roll the dice, the ethical is to shake the dice perpetually without rolling. To shake the dice means to suspend them in a 

    187 26/08/2014   5:06:20 PM

:88  Ethics
state of indecision. While in mid- shake, dice express all their numbers  at once; they may be one of any possible combinations. And as one of 
any, they are, in e)ect, all the numbers at the same time. Dice in mid- shake are, in Deleuzian language, the virtual, for they express the complete number space of the dice all at once. No discrete numbers have yet appeared; the numbers have not been digitized. Laruelle's word for this  
is  superposition,  the  term  he  borrows  from  quantum  theory.  While  in  a state of superposition, discrete states superimpose and virtualize into 

each other, obviating their relative distinction. But once the dice land, a particular number is actualized from out of the virtuality of the number 
space.To be ethical means to metastasize the real. As metastasis, the ethi- 
cal means to think and act in terms of the total possibility space of the real. Never a question of deciding, dividing, or demonstrating one's allegiances,  the  ethical  requires  a  recognition  of  the  total,  !nite  space  of being as it pertains simultaneously and in parallel. The ethical is never  
a question of position, never a question of drawing a line in the sand, never a digitization. Rather, the threshold of the ethical is transgressed 
precisely  at  the  moment  when  all  positions  merge  into  equality  with themselves, and all lines are erased by the rising winds.

"The more I am anonymous, the more I am present." If the political ulti-mately entails self- interest, the ethical ultimately entails self- sacri!ce. Acts 
of charity are thus ethical rather than political because they require indis-tinction of self and other. Such acts are rightly labeled sel(ess because they 
require a lessening of the self, a lessening of the point system that would polarize the world into I and thou. So a migration from politics to ethics 
requires a migration from self- interest to self- sacri!ce, from the promo-tion of the self to a demotion of the self, from visibility to invisibility.

But does this automatically mean that the ethical subject is an evanes-cent subject? Does this mean that the ethical act is a monastic act bent  
on  self- denial,  even  repression?  How  does  the  ethical  life  synchronize with theories of agency and empowerment? Is the ethical subject any less 
visible or less present than its political counterpart? What is the relation-ship between presence and visibility under the ethical regime?

According to some of the more well- trodden assumptions, presence and visibility correspond directly with each other. The more something 

    188 26/08/2014   5:06:20 PM

  Ethics  :89
is present, the more it is visible; the less present, the less visible. Follow-ing  the  phenomenologists,  the  presence  of  a  thing  is  simply  another  
way to speak about its appearing in the world. Early in Being and Time, Heidegger  de!nes  the  phenomenon  as  that  which  shows  itself.

13  The  

discourse  of  identity  politics,  in  anything  from  Ellison's  Invisible  Man  to  Spivak's  "Can  the  Subaltern  Speak?"  often  concerns  itself  with  the 

relative capacity or incapacity of certain subjects to achieve expressive visibility in the world, thereby realizing a greater and fuller presence.

But another current exists, too, from the opacity of queer theory with its interest in illegibility and "no future" to the obfuscatory and somewhat monastic mandate of recent activism, which might appear under the anonymous name of Anonymous, or which might carry only a singular cataclysmic demand, that of "having no demands.""I need to become anonymous. In order to be present," write Tiqqun 
in their short text "How Is It to Be Done?" "The more I am anonymous, the  more  I  am  present."

14  Curious  at  first,  Tiqqun's  claim  nevertheless 

rings true. Invisibility and presence need not be mutually exclusive. One might imagine a scenario in which the greater the withdrawal from identi!cation, the nearer the presence; the greater the withdrawal from the world system, the sweeter the experience.

Indeed, in a world in which informatic capture predominates, in which technologies of identi!cation and pro!ling have saturated both the commercial sector, via genetics and information technology, and the govern-ment sector, via data mining or drone surveillance, it would make sense 
for presence to lodge itself ever more intimately within the cloak of invis-ibility.  "From  now  on,  to  be  perceived  is  to  be  defeated."

15  To  be  perceived is to be identi!ed, and to be identi!ed is to be removed from life.But this is no longer a moral claim about authenticity. This is an ethical claim, a claim about virtualization not digitization. As Tiqqun shows, the ethical mode is never one of actualization, never an act of making 
specific, of grounding or locating or identifying. The ethical mode is a virtualization.  If  the  political  is  a  question  of  points,  of  introducing  a 
hard  distinction  into  a  hitherto  smooth  !eld,  the  ethical  reverses  the logic: not point but curve, not distinction but indistinction.

If during the "#%,s and "##,s much of Anglo American culture and philosophy was concerned, both temporally and critically, with the pre!x  of  the  post-   (from  postmodernism  to  postpunk  and  everything  in 

    189 26/08/2014   5:06:20 PM

:9;  Ethics
between), today the new concern is the pre!x of the non- , in- , or un-  (for which Laruelle's non- philosophy is the most recent avatar). If the "#%,s 
impulse  was  to  pursue  a  logic  of  supersession,  the  "Hegel  of  history," today the logic is that of cancellation or invalidation, the "Hegel of negation," in which even the dialectic is negated and atrophied into oblivion.Which  is  not  to  introduce  a  new  set  of  points,  a  new  political  distinction between inauthentic capture and authentic resistance, between them and us. Just as Laruelle's non- philosophy is not a  reflection on philosophy, just as non- philosophy is neither a supersession nor dialectical negation  of  philosophy,  the  ethical  achieves  its  indistinction  not  by 
opposing  being  but  rather  by  demilitarizing  being,  by  standing  down. The ethical atrophies the political distinction, it does not cultivate it. If 
the  political  derives  its  power  from  the  provisional  confrontations  of "this"  or  "that"  particularity,  the  ethical  revels  in  the  weak  and  !nite, 
adhering to "the  something" as an axiomatic  principle. This  is  what it means to force a change from digital to analog. It means a shift from my 
thing to something.Phenomenology teaches that the presence of an entity has to do with 
its  appearing  in  a  world.  Once  having  appeared,  the  self-- that  special entity of mine, for as Heidegger writes, "Dasein is an entity which is in 
each case I myself; its Being is in each case mine"-- may habituate itself to  certain  everyday  activities,  certain  familiar  ways  of  socializing  and 
interacting with others.16In  Part  IV  of  Being  and  Time  Heidegger  introduces  a  specific  term  
to encompass this experience, the "they" [Das Man]. Through the they, Heidegger hoped to illustrate the impersonal singular pronoun, in other 
words, "who it is that Dasein is in its everydayness."17 The English imper-sonal  pronoun  one  might  capture  the  sense  of  it.  The  they- self  is  the 
human  subject  at  its  most  habituated  or  cliche'.  It  is  a  fundamentally inauthentic mode of existence for Heidegger. "The Self of everyday Dasein is the they- self, which we distinguish from the authentic Self. . . . As they- self,  the  particular  Dasein  has  been  dispersed  into  the  `they',  and 
first  must  !nd  itself."18  The  they  is  Heidegger's  way  of  understanding  the  socialization  of  people,  and  indeed  the  social  sphere  at  large.  Not 

exactly the realm of ideology, a term that would not entirely square with Heidegger's  overall  approach,  the  concept  nevertheless  comes  close  to 
identifying the social habituation of ideological forces.

    190 26/08/2014   5:06:20 PM

  Ethics  :9:

Heidegger's is one way of thinking about impersonal experience. But there are other ways. Tiqqun, for one, magni!es and displaces the alienating tendency of the they. Tiqqun uses the French pronoun on (often capitalized as ON for extra e)ect) to refer to a somewhat ominous and 
impersonal social subject. If Heidegger's "they" is the impersonal quality that  lives  within  the  self,  Tiqqun's  "they"  is  a  specific  antagonist,  the 
monster of the dehumanizing and alienating world system.Yet  apart  from  both  Heidegger's  "they"  and  Tiqqun's  "they"  exists 
another way of thinking about the impersonal. For in Tiqqun there is also the form- of- life, a term borrowed from Agamben, which Tiqqun de!nes 
in terms of the generic imperson who exists apart from the in(uences  of  Empire.  Such  are  the  two  poles  of  Tiqqun's  civil  war:  a  permanent 
agitation contra all, and a generic identity undetermined by the world system.  This  begins  to  describe  a  kind  of  impersonal  experience  not 
reducible to phenomenology. Indeed, the  ethical  life lies not in a sub- ject's practice within a worldly presence, but rather an imperson's withdrawal from being. Just as there is a phenomenological imperson, which was cast o) as inauthentic or otherwise nefarious, there is also an anti- 
phenomenological imperson, who virtualizes into indistinction.In  other  words,  whereas  presence  and  visibility  have  formerly  been 
understood  as  linked  and  mutually  bene!cial,  the  analog  indicates  a form of atrophied or muted presence forged from invisibility. What was 
once a political or moral question concerning the relative authenticity or inauthenticity of presence is now a thoroughly ethical question concerning the absolute inclusion of the totality at its lowest level.
All thought is essentially pre- Socratic. Shall  we deny it? Shall we  deny that all thought, when left to evolve far enough, tends toward a single 
interpretive anchor? Whether it be Plato toward the moral yardstick of the truth and the good, Hegel toward the totality of spirit, Badiou toward 
the  special  role  of  mathematics,  Derrida  toward  di)erence  or  supple-mentarity, Deleuze toward immanent multiplicity, or Laruelle toward the 
generic-- in  all  these  one  element  gains  special  favor  above  all  others. One thing is extracted and conserved in order to redeem, or at least explain, the rest of the universe.19In this way all thought is essentially pre- Socratic because it tends toward 

the form "All is water" or "All is (ux."20 Today the vocabulary has changed, 

    191 26/08/2014   5:06:20 PM

:9!  Ethics
if  not  the  form  of  rhetoric.  Today  we  hear  that  "everything  is  a  mar- ket,"  or  "everything  is  capital."  All  thought  is  essentially  pre- Socratic 
because it bends in the direction of the one, if not actually then at least asymptotically.

Isn't Kant's commitment to the self- clari!cation of knowledge a cer-tain kind of dogma just like any other? Isn't the neoliberal promotion of 
free markets the most brazen example of ideological manipulation? Even the various attempts to escape the master signi!er, from Aristotle's non- 
totalizing  catalogs  of  objects  to  pragmatism's  skepticism  toward  over-arching law, end up endorsing a more fundamental reality, the givenness 
of physical phenomena.Yet the most important question remains  the  pre- Socratic  one. The 
goal is not so much to arrive at a proposition of the form "All is x," in which  the  selection  of  x  is  of  paramount  importance.  The  goal  is  not  
so much !re, water, reason, capital, markets, or something else entirely. The goal is not all is water but water is all. The goal is not all is !re but 
!re  is  all.  In  short,  the  non- standard  question  is  not  "What  is  x?"  but "What is all?" What is the All? What is the one? What is the unary tendency of all being? And how can we withdraw from being in order to discover the one behind the unary tendency?

Perhaps this is why so many have returned to immanent materialism in the end, realizing how futile it is to (ee fate by abandoning all intellectual anchors only to defend a more fundamental commitment. Given that there seems to be little chance of escaping such unary tendencies, and 
given that the selection of the master signi!er is at best speculative (All is spirit) and at worst cynical (All is capital), why not side with the generic? 
Why  not  side  with  insuficientcy?  Not  an  in(ated  or  macroscopic  All, fueled by transcendental essence, but a de(ated insufficient one, discovered axiomatically via withdrawal from the philosophical decision.This  is  precisely  Laruelle's  strategy.  Indeed  both  Laruelle  and  Marx 
end up at the same place, except that they di)er on the question of suf-!ciency.  In  the  Marxian  tradition  things  like  material  history  and  the 
social totality are sufficient because they are enough to decipher all polit-ical riddles, solve all social problems. Yet for Laruelle humanity is found 
in  the  !nite  generic,  not  the  totalities  of  the  human  condition  or  the  vast, almost in!nite expanses of human history. Thus Laruelle's human is 
labeled insufficient rather than sufficient.

    192 26/08/2014   5:06:20 PM

  Ethics  :93

Laruelle adheres only to a single axiom-- call it dogma if you will-- that the one is the generically immanent real. Everything else stems from 
this. Thus humanity, as the non- standard clone of the one, is immune to the principle of suficientcy. Because humanity is already a generic category, there can be no thing like a "principle of sufficient humanity," no thing like a "human decision" that must be unilateralized, as the philosophical decision was before it. The reason is that humanity is a generic category  and  is  thus  non- standard  from  the  outset.  Just  like  the  real, 
Laruelle's  generic  humanity  is  already  the  result  of  having  withdrawn from the philosophical decision. Humanity is already generic, and thus 
is already, in a very literal sense, one. If this be dogma, so be it. It is the weakest and most insufficient form of dogma hitherto known.

We  advance  then  to  the  !nal  chapter  of  the  book  by  way  of  a  !nal provocation:  if  we  are  all  pre- Socratics  in  the  last  instance,  if  we  all 
adhere to some kind of dogma in the form of "All is x," why not uphold the one scrap of dogma that happens to be ethical as well, all is generic?

    193 26/08/2014   5:06:20 PM

t e n
The Generic

The terms analysis and synthesis have been at play already in the previ-ous chapters. They were used primarily to discuss digitality and the two 
moments of the dialectic, analysis as "one dividing in two" and synthesis as "two combining as one."

But the analytic/synthetic distinction is at best only partially applica-ble to Laruelle. As we have seen, the synthetic, de!ned by Kant as a judgment  containing  an  additive  predicate,  is  roundly  refused  by  Laruelle. There are few concepts more antonymic to non- philosophy than synthesis. Laruelle endlessly stresses the nonsynthetic nature of the clone, or the irreversible logic of unilaterial duality, or the monodirectional nature 
of  determination- in- the- last- instance.  The  one  does  not  enter  into  a synthesis with anything, and in fact Laruelle labels it "in- One" precisely 
because it is not synthesized into other things. The one is not hermeneu-tical because it does not open up onto any interpretation; it is not phenomenological  because  it  does  not  reveal  itself  to  a  solicitous  subject. The one cannot be socketed and linked up with anything else that might 
produce a synthesis.If  Deleuze  and  Guattari  meditate  on  the  deterritorializing  potential  
of the face-- because, as they explain, it is the part of the body with the most  holes-- Laruelle  does  something  quite  di)erent,  instead  singing  
in praise of the nonconnectivity of the one, in praise of the generic and radical territorialization of the one. The one is, in this sense, a mode of 
hyper- territorialization in which nothing can pass or communicate. A pro-phylactic ontology will be the best name for it, just as much of philosophy 

:95

    195 26/08/2014   5:06:20 PM

:96  The Generic
proposes  an  endless  series  of  promiscuous  ontologies.  Kant's  synthetic judgments therefore remain resolutely within the standard model.

(And now the trap may be sprung: if Deleuze and Laruelle are the two great thinkers of immanence in our time, Deleuze's immanence requires 
a radical mixing of the multiple, while Laruelle's immanence requires a unilateral nonrelation of the one. Thus where Deleuze is promiscuous, 
Laruelle  is  prophylactic,  either  too  much  sex  or  not  enough!  Which leaves Badiou in the middle, the great thinker of holy matrimony: stay 
faithful.)Yet  the  other  term,  the  analytic,  de!ned  as  a  judgment  that  does  
not  contain  an  additive  predicate,  is  much  more  in  keeping  with  the spirit of non- standard thinking. In fact, from a certain point of view, the 
Laruellean universe is an analytic universe through and through. If Kant sought to expand the window of the synthetic a priori as wide as possible,  and  thereby  steal  some  of  the  thunder  of  Hume's  own  skepticism toward that domain, Laruelle seeks to expand the window of the analytic 
a priori as wide as possible. Indeed, just as Kant used synthetic a poste-riori judgments to  help generalize outward into  the formal conditions  
of all cognition, Laruelle is using the conditions of cognition themselves (Kant's synthetic a priori, Heidegger's "foundations of metaphysics," or 
what Foucault would call the "conditions of possibility" for knowledge) and cloning them into transcendental axioms and a priori dualities.

1

Rather than root thinking in di)erence, as philosophy does, Laruelle roots thinking in identity. And as Kant and others remind us, the two  

key poles of the analytic are identity (n = n) and contradiction (n = ~n). The latter, contradiction, does not play much of a role in Laruelle's non- 
philosophy, but identity is crucial, practically coterminous with all of non- philosophy itself. This also indicates Laruelle's a*nity with the kingdom 
of the analytic. (To be sure, analysis, de!ned as the fundamentally digital process  of  dissecting  something  into  its  constituent  parts,  is  typically 
held at arm's length by Laruelle. Yet the realm of the analytic is attractive to him because it indicates a purely immanent and generic condition of 
the a priori.)Likewise  even  the  most  cursory  understanding  of  Laruelle's  One-  
in- One  indicates  the analytic, albeit a more unilateralized and generic version of the analytic seen in Kant and others. One- in- One refers not to 
a condition of ontological di)erence (one/other) but of immanence and 

    196 26/08/2014   5:06:20 PM

  The Generic  :97
identity. The expression "One- in- One" contains no additive predicate and is thus analytical.

For these reasons, one might describe Laruelle's project as a particu-larly rigorous analytic formalism, a rigorous rationalism, albeit a gnostic 
or mystical rationalism. His is an eclipse of the world by the analytic a priori, in which the domain of the analytic a priori is splayed open as 
widely as possible. Laruelle is not so much inverting Kant as reshu1ing his coordinates: instead of a certain subset of the human condition reserved for the analytic a priori, Laruelle wants to widen the analytic win-dow to include domains incompatible with previous philosophy.

Generic insu"ciency. But why are additive/synthetic and non- additive/analytic the main options? And is the analytic really the most appropriate 
way of conceiving Laruelle's anti- digitality? Indeed a number of think ers, among them Badiou and Agamben, have demonstrated the limitations of 
the analytic- synthetic model. Instead of additive or non- additive predi-cates, such thinkers propose a di)erent approach: a subtractive model in 
which predicates are subtracted from subjects, not added to them. Using concepts  like  the  "generic"  or  the  "whatever  singularity,"  these  writers 
have essentially proposed an alternative mode irreducible to either the synthetic or the analytic.

2

Although  the  analytic  may  be  provisionally  helpful, I  move  beyond the  analytic  and  conclude  the  book  with  what  is  arguably  the  most 

important single condition in Laruelle, the generic. The term has been used already throughout the book, but it is now possible to de!ne it in 
greater detail. To take up the question directly, we now shift into a slightly more  methodical  register and outline  three  aspects  of  the  generic:  the 
tactics of the generic, the objective generic, and the subjective generic.(") Tactics of the generic refer to the various techniques used to attain 
generic conditions. Groups like Tiqqun or the Invisible Committee address tactics of invisibility, opacity, or anonymity. These suggest one possible 
approach, but there are other approaches as well. Hardt and Negri, for example, have written on what they call "exodus" and "desertion," both 
techniques allowing access to the generic. "Whereas in the disciplinary era sabotage was the fundamental notion of resistance, in the era of imperial control it may be desertion," write Hardt and Negri.3 "Class strug-gle  in  the  biopolitical  context  takes  the  form  of  exodus . . .  [but]  this 

    197 26/08/2014   5:06:20 PM

:98  The Generic
exodus does not necessarily mean going elsewhere. We can pursue a line of (ight while staying right here."

4

The (ight of exodus is not so much a question of mobility through space,  not  so  much  a  question  of  running  and  hiding.  Rather,  exodus 

indicates a withdrawal from modes of identi!cation and representation. In this sense exodus is more a question of ontology than space or movement. Desertion and exodus mean a withdrawal from actualization, and hence a migration into superposition. Under the (ight of exodus, things 
are put into a state of virtuality.But such virtuality is merely a synonym for the generic. For when an 
entity withdraws into the generic it ceases to delimit itself by way of actual identi!cation.  Rather,  the  entity  metastasizes  into  a  virtual  space:  the 
shifting desert, the swarm of bees, or the darkness at the edge of town.Similar in spirit to invisibility, opacity, and exodus, Badiou describes 
the tactics of the generic in terms of subtraction. According to him the world as it appears is indeed real. There is nothing illusory or !ctitious 
about the state of things or the way in which certain things appear while others do not. Yet although such states are entirely within the realm of 
real  existence,  they  bear  no  inherent  truth  for  they  have  not  yet  been enchanted by an event. Peter Hallward explains it as follows:

The subtractive approach understands that the operations that consolidate 
"reality"-- representation, appearing, semblance: the state of the situation-- 
are not simply external to the real as a cover that might be removed, but 
are  organized  as  its  ontologically  irreducible  repression.  The  state  can- 
not be destroyed, but a truth can puncture its repression and suspend its 
domination.5

The generic is not achieved by way of adding something to the real, adding a true life on top of a false one, an authentic existence on top of  
a profane one. On the contrary, the generic is achieved by subtracting  the many de!nitional predicates that exist within reality. "The being of a 
truth is an in!nite set subtracted from every predicate in knowledge."6 What this means is that the liberated subject is not someone who adds 
new identities, new qualities, new powers and a)ordances, like so many options bundled into the latest automobile. On the contrary, the subject 
is only liberated to the extent that it is liberated from such qualities and 

    198 26/08/2014   5:06:20 PM

  The Generic  :99
a)ordances. The subject of truth is  the  subject who  can subtract itself from the given state of the situation, leaving being behind and adhering 
to the deviating vector of an event.(-) The various tactics of the generic-- including exodus, invisibility, 
and subtraction-- disclose two alternating possibilities, not so much dis-tinct from each other  as alternating aspects  of  a single  state of immanence.  These  are  the  generic  condition  (or  objective  generic)  and  the generic person (or subjective generic).

The objective generic is spatial, embedded into things and environ-ments.  Through  the  objective  generic,  things  are  allowed  to  disgorge 
their  pro!les  and  abdicate  responsibility  for  their  aspects  and  sensual interfaces.

Foucault was searching for the objective generic when he wrote about heterotopias  in  his  fantastic  essay  "Of  Other  Spaces."

7  If  he  did  not 

entirely  !nd  them,  Foucault  at  least  revealed  the  di)erence  between homogenous infrastructure and heterogeneous infrastructure. Today we 

would call  this  a virtualization  or  a becoming- analog.  In  Foucault the digital  infrastructure  of  house,  hospital,  school,  and  factory  gives  way  
to a continuous alternation of heterogeneous spaces, from graveyard, to museum, to fairground. It is a necessary first step toward the objective 
generic, which marks a continuation beyond the specificity of the analog into the generic immanence of space.

These generic spaces are nothing like Marc Auge''s "non- places," the sites of banality and vacancy that proliferate under late capitalism.

8 The 

two could not be more di)erent. Rather, the virtual or generic space is more like what Deleuze, in Cinema $, calls the any- space- whatever [espace 

quelconque], a  topic  discussed  previously  in the context of analog and digital  spatiality.

9  Deleuze's  description  of  the  leopard  and  the  pool  in 

Jacques Tourneur's Cat People ("#/-) captures it well. "In the swimming pool of Cat People, the attack is only seen on the shadows of the white 

wall," he writes.10 The predator woman does not so much become a leop-ard, but become a space, a leopard- space which surrounds its prey from 
all possible vantages. Space itself, as it virtualizes, becomes predatory. Not a becoming- leopard but a virtual- leopard, generic to its locality.

In  this  sense,  Deleuze's  any- space- whatever  inverts  "non- places"  or vacant  spaces  (those,  for  example,  depicted  at  the  end  of  Antonioni's 
Eclipse) into a metastable or virtual space. These spaces become whatever 

    199 26/08/2014   5:06:20 PM

!;;  The Generic
spaces despite their digital core. What began as a whateverness of point, a  digital  whateverness,  inverts  into  a  generic  virtuality. The  leopard  is 
not there in the space, because it has metastasized across the entire room, visible only in the glint of light  reflected on a wall, and audible only in 
the recursion of the echo of the screaming prey.(.) The second alternation is the generic person or the subjective generic. 
If specific individuals are marked as persons, the subjective generic is im-personal, and hence bears the name of the imperson. As we have seen, 
the generic as imperson is absolutely central in the work of Badiou. Yet the subjective generic appears across a number of other thinkers as well. 
Levinas viewed the impersonal in both dialectical and phenomenologi-cal  terms,  as  part  of  the  alternations  of  expression  and  self- alienation 
that constitute the relationship between self and other. The person ges-tures outward toward the other, the imperson, and in so doing achieves 
some  modicum  of  presence.11  Likewise,  Lyotard  makes  a  distinction, albeit more severe, between the human and the inhuman in his book The 

Inhuman: Re9ections on Time.12 For Lyotard the inhuman is "an unclean non- world," a kind of "miserable and admirable indetermination" from 
which we are born and to which we must return in order to make sense of our being.

13

Yet there is an alternative description of the imperson that is decid-edly less melancholy. Beyond Badiou's generic, there are Deleuze's meditations on the neutral and the impersonal, and Laruelle's explication of the Homme- en- personne, which has been translated as Man- in- Person, 
but with some allowance for artistic license might now also be rendered as Impersonal- Man or Man- in- Imperson.

"Singularity is neutral," Deleuze wrote in The Logic of Sense, by which he meant that a singularity avoids both the universal and the particular.

14 

A singularity is not de!ned by reference to some overarching principle or transcendental category, nor is it understood through attention to the 

specificities of its own mode of being. A singularity is merely an in(ec-tion point, neutral and impersonal. The plane of immanence is thus a 
plane of "impersonal and pre- individual" singularities.15With his victim- in- person, Laruelle follows Deleuze's lead and uses the 
French personne to refer to an impersonal or generic person.16 Laruelle uses  Man- in- Person  to  refer  to  the  immanent  state  of  the  human.  In  
fact he sometimes writes it as Man- in- Man, mimicking the tautological 

    200 26/08/2014   5:06:20 PM

  The Generic  !;:
structure  of  the  term  One- in- One,  in  order  to  underscore  the  impor-tance of immanence.

17

Casting. The three aspects of the generic-- tactics, objective spaces, and impersonal  subjects-- can  be  uni!ed  under  a  single  operation  called 
"casting." Recall the story of the fruit buyer, which Heidegger retells from Hegel: "Someone wants to buy fruit in a store. He asks for fruit. He is 
o)ered apples and pears, he is o)ered peaches, cherries, grapes. But he rejects  all  that  is  o)ered.  He  absolutely  wants  to  have  fruit.  What  was 
o)ered to him in every instance is fruit and yet, it turns out, fruit cannot be bought."

18

Casting  is  the  act  of  converting  peaches,  cherries,  grapes  into  fruit.  It is possible to cast toward specificity. But what interests us here is the 

act  of  upcasting  or  casting  "upward"  toward  the  generic  supernature. Upcasting  means  to  cast  an  entity  into  a  mode  of  being  that  is  more 
generic than the current mode. Hence casting takes place when a more maximally de!nitional term is converted into a more minimally de!nitional term. Relatively speaking, a pear or an apple is more maximally de!-nitional; fruit less so. Thus the apple can be cast into fruit. (Although the 
reverse is not true, generic fruit cannot be cast into this or that piece of fruit unless additional precautions are taken to ensure a proper outcome.)

The term casting is borrowed from computer programming languages whereby one data type (or in our parlance, one set of givens) is cast into 
another data type (another set of givens). In the computer context, cast-ing is a conversion done on a type hierarchy, whereby the individuated 
object becomes less individuated. For the generic, the key issue is that any given a can only be cast into a given A if A is a parent of a. That is  
to  say, a has to  be  a less generic  version  of A, thereby  including all  of  A within it.

This  is  another  way  to  illustrate  the  ethical  nature  of  the  generic, because an entity (or person) must abandon parts of the specificity of its 
own givenness, even if only by small increments. Thus, although a polit-ical claim might come in the form of "Woman's work should be recognized" or "Animals have rights," an ethical claim will always come in the form "There is no woman" or "Speciation must be dissolved," because the 
ethical  claim  cares less  about accruing additional  presence than  about casting toward the generic.

    201 26/08/2014   5:06:20 PM

!;!  The Generic

The ethical and the political are complimentary, even if they remain distinct. Consider Deleuze and his central ontological claim concerning 
the univocity of being. Because it is on the side of the generic continuum, univocity itself can never be political, only ethical. But to !ght and struggle 
on behalf of univocity, so that it may be elevated to the level of core ontol-ogy, as Deleuze did, is to !ght a political !ght. To argue for the univocity 
of  being  one  must  politically  outmaneuver  other  possibilities  (be  they metaphysical  dualism,  dialectical  negation,  generic  nihilism,  or  other 
possibilities not yet known). Likewise to assert the axiom of human rights is to make an ethical assertion, even if the !ght for human rights remains 
a political !ght. Where the political requires a recognition of the multiple, the ethical requires a return to the one. To be political requires the decision of distinction, but to be ethical requires the dissolution of distinction.Against the backdrop of revolution and black Jacobin terror, the axiom 
in the Haitian Constitution that all citizens are black can only be under-stood as an ethical claim, not a political one-- even if endless political 
battles had to be fought in the hopes of achieving it. So too the biblical prophecy that the meek shall inherit the earth is an ethical claim not a 
political one. And again the communist hypothesis is, ultimately, an eth-ical hypothesis, even if it might require political maneuvers of various 
kinds.The  ethical  is  never  a  law  or  a  system  of  laws.  The  ethical  pertains 
when the law is suspended in favor of a single !nite and generic axiom. The ethical might assert axiomatically that all are equal. It might exhort 
the absolute inclusion of the excluded. Regardless, these are both ethical claims not political ones because they refuse to elect a single kind of subject over all others. To say all men are created equal, as in Greek democ-racy or in many modern democracies both before and after civil rights 
(where gender equality remains an un!nished project), is to  assume a political commandment, for male is not a generic category and therefore 
cannot be an ingredient of any ethics. As Laruelle says, only human--  or indeed trans- species categories like creature or entity-- could possibly 
become a generic category. And only the generic can indicate the ethical.But the ethical does not trump the political. It may be more generic, 
but it is not necessarily more important or more in(uential. In fact, just as digitization and virtualization are two sides of the same coin, the ethical and the political are fused together.

    202 26/08/2014   5:06:21 PM

  The Generic  !;3

Man? Human? Creature? The designation of the generic category is often  a  political  question.  As  during  the  civil  rights  struggles  and  the 
culture wars, there are real political struggles over what constitutes the elemental axis of subjugation, or indeed whether there exist elemental 
axes in the first place. These are essentially political struggles about ethi-cal questions. Which category is most constitutive (politically) of social 
relations (ethically): queerness or class position? Ethnicity or gender? Or hybrids and coalitions formed across these categories: black feminism, 
queer communism, or proletarianism uniting the Global South? Such real political struggles determine what kinds of ethical claims are possible.

Consider the American founding fathers and the way in which a sup-posed  generic  category,  white  men  of  a  certain  standing,  was  used  to 
make an ethical claim, that all men are created equal. In that instance the ethical category was insufficiently generic. It prompted political struggles over the status of the category itself, ultimately ensuring protection for nonwhites, women, and so on. The founding fathers were thus ethically progressive even as they were politically de!cient. It was ethical to assert "all . . . equal," even if the claim was rooted in a political fallacy, 
that  white  men  of  a  certain  standing  might  adequately  constitute  the generic. For this reason the ethical should not trump the political. In fact, 
ethical claims by themselves can result in a kind of odious universalism if they are not mitigated and adjusted by real political struggle over the 
conditions of the generic.Danger arises in direct proportion to assumptions of suficientcy. Dif!culty comes when one category is assumed to be sufficient enough for all. To  correct  such  dangers  the  generic  category should be  rigorously 
and regularly exposed to a criterion of insu"ciency.Have we assumed (falsely) that the liberal subject is sufficient for global 
prosperity? Have we assumed (falsely) that consumer choice is sufficient for healthy societies? Have we assumed (falsely) that cap- and- trade markets are sufficient to protect the environment? Such questions will indi-cate the failed suficientcy of these various categories (the liberal subject, 
consumer choice, markets). These various categories are not insu"cient enough and thus can never act as the core of any ethical claim.

Although  it  indicates  movement  from  greater  to  lesser  specificity,  the generic is still not a synonym for the total. To move in the direction 
of the generic does not mean to broaden the category to include more 

    203 26/08/2014   5:06:21 PM

!;4  The Generic
entities. The generic does not operate through an additive logic or even the metaphors of the melting pot or the big tent. The generic does not 
mean white men, plus women, plus people of color, plus another group, and  plus  another.  Such  additive  logic  will  never  arrive  at  the  generic.  
The non- standard model does not operate via a sequential summation  of digitality.

As both Laruelle and Badiou indicate, the generic operates through a logic of subtraction or withdrawal: people of color subtracted from structures  of  alterity;  or  the  working  class  subtracted  from  alienated  labor. This avoids the "We are the world" trap of today's bourgeois liberalism in 
which a single privileged subject extends its arms to embrace and encom-pass all the world's downtrodden. The point of the generic is not to elect 
a single so- called neutral type, such as the modern Western liberal dem-ocratic subject, and project it universally to all of humanity. The generic 
is not simply the white man's burden dressed up in new clothes. If such  a reactionary strategy deserves classi!cation, it would be classi!ed under 
the rubric of the political, as certain groups struggle to gain a piece of the pie. But the point of the generic is to show that pies and their pieces are 
poor metaphors to begin with.Indeed one point of criticism heard from time to time is that despite 
its good intentions the generic is ultimately a position of privilege, that in essence the generic is simply another name for the liberal theory of 
justice outlined in John Rawls, in which a very specific kind of subject is taken to be the model for all subjectivity. Indeed Rawls's "veil of ignorance" may resemble casting, and his "original position" may resemble generic indecision. Yet the two approaches are fundamentally incompatible, and it is worth explicitly debunking this misconception.The Rawlsian subject follows what in chapter - was labeled the One 
Two of di)erential being. As outlined in the standard model, di)erential being acts as a form of transcendental a*rmation in that it cultivates a 
single identity, a one, and projects that identity outward onto the entities of the world, the many twos existing as a  reflection of the one. Rawlsian 
liberals follow a similar logic when they describe how individuals may project themselves into the role of the transcendental subject.

By contrast, the generic does not describe a community bound together by any transcendental core. Rather, the generic, if it describes a community at all, describes a community formed from all who have withdrawn 

    204 26/08/2014   5:06:21 PM

  The Generic  !;5
from  decision.  This  is  sometimes  described  enigmatically  as  a  com- mons of those who have nothing in common, or the part of no part.

19 

The generic is not a position of privilege, far from it. In fact, the generic is something more akin to a generalized subaltern in that it dissolves all 

privilege and specificity into a !nite and immanent generic real.As gay, proletarian, Jew, or woman, we are not (eeced of our identities. Rather, we  dis- individuate  into  a generic commonality  of alterity. And in so doing we regain our very identities, whatever they may be, now 
unmarked  by  the  infrastructures  of  representation  that  had  hitherto delimited and de!ned them.

The Rawlsian liberal subject is a digital subject. It is sufficient; it re-quires the replication of a homogenous discrete substrate. Yet the generic 
person (ees digitality by way of the analog, and ultimately (ees the sys-tem of distinction entirely, both digital and analog. Thus there can be no 
commonality between Rawlsian justice and generic justice. The former is digital and the latter is not. The former follows the transcendental and 
the latter follows the immanent. The former is a*rmative and the latter subtractive.

So the political is two and the ethical is one again. But in saying this, in saying that the ethical is one again, are we not guilty of romanticiz- 
ing the return, indeed guilty of lapsing into a kind of poetic ontology? Are  we  not  guilty  of  turning  being  into  therapy,  into  an  ontology  of 
integrity? To say again is to project a narrative of loss and recovery. To say again is to make the story of being a story about norms and obligations. For to say again is to privilege the one as the normal condition that ought to be and to demote the world of decision as some profane, fallen 
existence.The charge is legitimate, at least in one sense. If the goal is to avoid  
a  poetic  ontology then we  should review the  previous  sections  on  the political, where all manner of nonpoetic schisms and alienations reign 
supreme. But if the goal is an ethics we will necessarily !nd ourselves in the landscape of the poetic or quasi- poetic. There is little hope in escaping it, because the ethical is by de!nition the (ight from distinction and a return to immanence. The ethical is by de!nition the integration into 
the common.Is it possible to integrate into the common without the lingering scent 
of poetic presence? Perhaps, after all, the one is just a number. But still, 

    205 26/08/2014   5:06:21 PM

!;6  The Generic
when (eeced of motivation and meaning, the one approaches a kind of nihilism, whether Deleuze's e)ervescent and a*rmative nihilism of the 
One- All or Badiou's subtractive void of the Barred One. To counteract such  tendencies  the  one  should  be  re- enchanted  with  motivation  and 
meaning.This  is  why  Deleuze  never  cleansed  himself  of  a  lingering  vitalism 
when he could have easily done so. It is why Heidegger never cleansed himself  of  a  certain  mystical  romanticism.  Both  thinkers  understood 
that the ultimate danger lies in abandoning core ontological questions  to the brute vicissitudes of formal abstraction. For the one is a number, 
but it is not just any number.This is one way in which Badiou's ontology is inferior to that of both 
Deleuze and Heidegger, and why when Badiou mocks both his prede-cessors  for  having a  poetic  ontology  his  barbs are  unconvincing,  even 
cynical. In Badiou's estimation, the poetic ontologies of his predecessors belie  a  lingering  ideology,  romanticism  in  the  case  of  Heidegger  and 
vitalism in Deleuze. But the reverse is also true, because to suggest that ontology is hard- nosed math is the ultimate ideological trap; to superimpose a nihilistic scientism on top of ontology is the ultimate ideologi-cal conceit.

From cheating to forcing. A !nal question remains that will help adjudi-cate the debate. How is it possible to di#erentiate between legitimate and 
illegitimate ethical or political actions?Recall  Badiou  and  the  old  Maoist  disputes  around  the  maxims  of  
"the one dividing in two" and "the two coming together as one." In the introduction to this book Badiou was quoted recounting that those who 
espouse the first maxim are declared leftists, while those endorsing the second are called rightists. But in the interim we have shown that it is 
possible to substitute the political for division and the ethical for fusion, because  the  political  is  de!ned  via  the  division  of  digitality,  while  the 
ethical is de!ned via the virtualization of superposition.Do  the  labels  leftist  and  rightist  still  hold?  Not  exactly,  because  the 
structure of the debate needs to be reframed. The point is not to privilege division over fusion but to superimpose both terms onto a continuum of 
legitimacy and illegitimacy. For there may be legitimate digitality (pro-gressive  politics)  and  there  may  be  illegitimate  digitality  (reactionary 

    206 26/08/2014   5:06:21 PM

  The Generic  !;7
politics), just as there may be legitimate virtualization (progressive eth-ics) and illegitimate virtualization (reactionary ethics).

In order to explain what this means consider the concept of cheating. What does it mean to cheat today? For the present discussion, cheating 
may  be  de!ned  as  a  circumvention  of  necessary  structure.  (As  de!ned  in  the  introduction,  the  principle  of  sufficient  digitality  states  that  for 
everything in the world there is a process of distinction appropriate to it; hence cheating can also be de!ned as a circumvention of sufficient digitality.) If the structure in question is a durational process, cheating refers to the circumvention of the necessary steps in the process, or a shorting 
of  the  necessary  duration  required  for  the  process  to  gestate  properly.  If the structure in question is an entity, cheating refers to the circumvention of the necessary points required to de!ne the entity. If the structure in question is a piece of software, cheating refers to the circumvention  
of normal physical limitations regarding access, executability, or logical performance.

Consider a day- to- day example: the way fruits and vegetables are har-vested today under conditions of industrial farming. Bananas and other 
kinds of fruit naturally give o) small quantities of ethylene gas, which act as a ripening agent. With such a long distance to travel and such a short 
window for ripeness, bananas grown for export are often culled from the tree while still green, then shipped or (own to air- tight warehouses !lled 
with ethylene gas. The amount of gas is controlled in such a way as to induce the bananas to complete their ripening cycle just before arriving 
at market. Surrounded by gas the bananas ripen even while severed from the tree, in absence of rain, soil, sun, and all the temporal and physical 
conditions typically present during ripening.A  very  practical  solution,  this  is  nevertheless  cheating,  as  de!ned 
here, because  it  is  a  circumvention  of  a  spatio- temporal  structure,  the banana's  growth  cycle.  After  skipping  or  circumventing  the  !nal  steps  
of the cycle, impoverishing the development of the fruit, banana growers compensate by reinvigorating the fruit with excess gas on their way to 
market.The  banana  conglomerates  are  notorious  cheats  when  it  comes  to 
labor practices and treatment of the environment.20 But here they also cheat nature, by cheating the bananas themselves and thereby cheating 
all of those who ingest them for sustenance.

    207 26/08/2014   5:06:21 PM

!;8  The Generic

Assuming it is possible to digitize the growth cycle of the banana, to isolate and itemize each element and step required to cultivate healthy 
fruit, modern industrial farming indeed cheats the cycle simply because it removes certain  necessary elements  and steps, combining some  elements and substituting others.This is not to say that all digitization is cheating, for there can be a 
faithful technique of digitization, one that respects all the necessary ele-ments and steps. Yet the industrial banana falls short, and is thus accurately labeled "inauthentic" digitization.Badiou's taut and atonal worlds help understand the di)erence between 
authentic and inauthentic digitization. The simple process of becoming- discrete is so  common and general that it carries no  specific valences. 
Digitization is an unaligned force, meaning it carries no necessary ethi-cal  or  political allegiances. There  may  be  authentic  digitization  just as 
there may be inauthentic digitization. There may be politically progres-sive digitization just as there may be politically reactionary digitization. 
One is taut, the other atonal.Thus  legitimate digitization is  de!ned as the itemization or identi!-
cation  of a  series  of  points  without circumvention.  An  entity,  process,  or relation is de!ned as a series of points, following the normal procedure.  For  example,  under  the  legitimate  digitization  of  an  entity,  the entity is recast as a series of aspects of a phenomenon. Under the legitimate digitization of a process, the process is recast as a series of singu-larities  on  a  continuum.  Likewise  under  the  legitimate  digitization  of  
a relation, the relation is recast as a series of functions collected within an interface.

All three of these new modalities-- phenomenal aspect, continual sin-gularity, and interface function-- are the digital counterparts of what were 
previously nondigital realities. There is nothing horri!c or profane about them. They are all instances of normal or legitimate digitization.

Virtualization can be thought in similar terms. Legitimate virtualiza-tion is de!ned as the disintegration of points into indistinction without 
circumvention.  An  entity,  process,  or  relation  is  rendered  insufficient according to the normal procedure. Thus entities, as indistinct or insuf!cient, withdraw into the generic or impersonal. Processes, as indistinct or insufficient, withdraw into exodus  or desertion.  Relations, as indistinct or insufficient, withdraw into disappearance or invisibility.

    208 26/08/2014   5:06:21 PM

  The Generic  !;9

But what of the abnormal, dishonorable, or illegitimate? What of in-authentic digitization and inauthentic virtualization? Thesis XII asserts 
that politicization means digitization. Politicization means that a generic continuum is reorganized into a series of points. But the reverse is not 
necessarily true. Given a series of points, it is not necessarily true that political action or political consciousness will follow.

In order to broaden the discussion slightly, now consider the di)er-ence between cheating and forcing. What is forcing, and how is forcing 
di)erent from cheating?Badiou de!nes forcing as the transformation of a given situation by 
virtue of a hypothetical principle.21 With forcing, a hidden impossibility within the situation becomes visible and possible. As Badiou says, consider the di)erence between two simple truth claims: I love you, and I will always love you. The first, I love you, is "a !nite declaration, a subjective  point,  and  a  pure  choice,  but  `I  will  always  love  you'  is  a  forcing  and an anticipation. It forces a new bit of knowledge in the situation of 
love."22 I do is a simple claim, a choice like any other. But I will is a vow,  a forcing of the present situation into one specific future at the expense 
of all the others. In this way, forcing is a way of imposing decision onto an erstwhile murky scenario. I will always-- the future is speci!ed via the 
introduction of a trenchant, hypothetical principle.Cheating  and  forcing  thus  run  in  opposite  directions.  If  cheating 
means the circumvention of structure, forcing means the extrapolation of structure. Cheating tends to dull and deaden the facts of the situation 
(by truncating them), while forcing strengthens and extends the situa-tion into one of several virtualities. Cheating enervates the subject, while 
forcing energizes it.Armed  with  these  two  concepts,  it  is  now  possible  to  de!ne  digital 
cheating,  digital  forcing,  virtual  cheating,  and  virtual  forcing.  Digital cheating means a circumvention of the integrity of necessary points that 
make up an entity, process, or relation. The circumvention in question can be temporal, in which the duration between points becomes shorter; 
logical, in which the points move closer; or material, in which the points are impoverished or winnowed in number. As digital exploits or circumventions, this kind of cheating in essence "lowers the resolution" of the digitization process. It results in an impoverished digitality, a mode of 
encoding the real in which too much of reality falls through the cracks.

    209 26/08/2014   5:06:21 PM

!:;  The Generic

Although certain kinds of digital exploits have their own utility-- for example peer- to- peer !le sharing circumventing more traditional distribution channels-- digital cheating on the whole produces problems, par-ticularly under conditions in which the points themselves are corroded 

to such a degree as to be ine)ective as points. Contemporary consumer society  is  nothing  if  not  a  vast  proliferation  of  choice,  as  people  are 
obliged to choose paper or plastic, choose Chevy or Ford, choose this  or that. But in such scenarios the choice has been thoroughly cheated. 
The process of becoming- discrete has been circumvented, rendering its analytic power more or less useless. Such cheated digitalities are digital 
in name only.By contrast, digital forcing means the introduction of structure within 
indecision. Similar to Badiou's theory of points, digital forcing is a kind of  binarization  in  which  a  multiplicity  of  points  are  reduced  to  two  
discrete options. The goal is to isolate and focus two points over all the others. As such, digital forcing (point making) is most useful when indistinction is the problem.For  example,  during  the  electoral  process  in  most  representational 
democracies, the relative indistinction between candidates is leveraged and abused by powerful interests in order to enforce the status quo. In 
such situations indistinction itself is the problem, and so digital forcing becomes  absolutely  crucial  as  subjects  take  principled  stands  on  campaign !nancing, proliferate third parties, and so on. Such forced digitali-ties energize and enliven distinction, charting a path into the future.

Along the superpositional axis, virtual cheating means a circumven-tion of the generic univocity that makes up an entity, process, or relation. 
It replaces generic insuficientcy with a form of false universality driven by  the  special  interests  of  one  or  more  participants.  This  kind  of  circumvention produces a universality- without- collectivity. Hence virtual cheating tends to form monocultures or totalities. It tends to produce a 
general dominant, a hegemony not of the one but of a single transcen-dental element.

Examples of virtual cheating include neoliberalism and protocol. In fact, in such cases the political and the ethical work together; politics, 
when it  is  subject to  cheating, will  often invert and become  a  cheated ethics. The forcing of decision, as when choice is repeated too frequently 
and evacuated of real meaning, results in a kind of numbing, continuous 

    210 26/08/2014   5:06:21 PM

  The Generic  !::
monotony of indecision. Likewise the monotony of a cheated ethics fos-ters a surrender mentality at the level of the political, the popular cynicisms of "Nothing I do really matters" or "There is no alternative."Opposite  this,  virtual  forcing  means  a  rejuvenated  withdrawal  from 
distinction. Not so much a circumvention of points, virtual forcing means the  rendering obsolete  of all  points whatsoever. As  such it produces  a 
generic ethics. Fleeing the stale air of universality- without- collectivity, virtual forcing breathes new life into its antonym, collectivity- without- 
universality, a dictatorship of insuficientcy. It lives within the tautology of identity, where all are equal, where "no one is illegal."

  Digital Cheating  Virtual Cheating  "Tweedledum and Tweedledee"  "There is no alternative"
  Digital Forcing  Virtual Forcing  "Accept or reject"  "No one is illegal"

These four quadrants neatly summarize the two basic vectors under investigation:  (")  the  ethico- analog  vector,  which  moves  from  a  series  
of points to a generic continuum, that is, from distinction to indistinc-tion; and (-) the politico- digital vector, which moves from a generic continuum to a series of points, or from indistinction to distinction.In the language of media theory, the first vector lowers the resolution, 
changing from hot to cool, while the second raises the resolution, chang-ing  from  cool  to  hot.  The  first  follows  a  one- structure  of  immanence 
rooted in generic practice, the second a two- structure of relation rooted in criticism, antagonism, and wars of position.

The relationships between the quadrants can be read in di)erent ways. At first glance the determining axis appears to be the relationship between 
the left and right sides of the table, between digitality and virtuality. Fol-lowing  such  an  interpretation,  the  politico- digital  vector  moves  from 
right to left, rendering the formerly indistinct virtualities more distinct, while  the  ethico- analog  vector  moves  from  left  to  right,  transforming 
decision into superposition.But viewed from a di)erent perspective, the determining axis is the 
relationship between the top and bottom of the table. From this perspec-tive, cheating and forcing take precedence over digitality and virtuality, 
and the determining movement becomes the movement out of cheating 

    211 26/08/2014   5:06:21 PM

!:!  The Generic
into forcing (regardless of whether it be digital forcing or virtual forc-ing). The vertical axis is similar to Badiou's atonal and taut worlds: atonal 
worlds  cheat  themselves  and  everyone  in  them,  but  taut  worlds  are worlds that can be forced.

Thesis XIV. The tendential fall in the rate of digitality. So which is it? Is forcing always better than cheating? Is the virtual better than the digital? 
Should we follow the generic immanence of the ethical life, or the repre-sentational power of the political life? Is it an immanence of direct cooperation, or a delegation of authority into structure? Shall we collapse into the immediacy of direct democracy, or relinquish command to the parliamentarians, be they liberal democrats or progressive party stalwarts? In short, is it anarchism or Leninism?

Even with the many lively debates across the social spectrum, few seem willing to adopt one or the other completely. Even the most staunch parliamentarians will abandon representational structures in their private lives. For who needs a vanguard to pass the salt? Likewise, the most committed anarchists struggle to explain how direct, cooperative democracy can survive at the level of a city, or a territory, or a planet.

Nevertheless,  a  strange  compromise  has  emerged  in  contemporary life, a strange mythology has galvanized the imagination, something like 
anarchism at home, Leninism abroad. What of our private lives are not, in the last analysis, exercises of direct relations? What free- market evangelist will return home and demand that market relations regulate exchange between siblings or neighbors? (Which is not to suggest that such interactions are not uncomplicated, or not unsullied by the power dynamics of patriarchy, bigotry, or other symbolic hierarchies!) Are we all not bottom up communists in the last analysis?23 Hence an "anarchism at home" in which immediacy and contingent interaction hold sway.

And what of the macro social sphere is not, ultimately, a delegation  of  powers?  Is  there  not  always  a  republicanism  lurking  at  the  end  of 
every town hall meeting? Is not every form of government secretly an oligarchy? Who in the Occupy movement, or other sites of direct democracy, has not at some point thrown up his or her hands and longed for  a  steering  committee  to  streamline  the  fussy  deliberations  of  the  gen- 
eral assembly? What grassroots activist has not wished, at some point, for a benevolent dictatorship to seize the reins and deliver us from this 

    212 26/08/2014   5:06:21 PM

  The Generic  !:3
profane existence? As Jo Freeman warned, we must beware the tyranny of  structurelessness.

24  Hence  a  "Leninism  abroad"  in  which  power  is 

exercised from afar and actions are taken on behalf of others.Anarchism  at  home,  Leninism  abroad-- both  the  left  and  the  right 

seem united under this mythology, an immediacy of the person and a delegation of the social, a virtuality at home and a digitality abroad.

But what if things were di)erent? Oh, the catastrophe if such conven-tions were upset or inverted. Could there be a Leninism of private life? 
An  anarchism  of  the  planet?  Was  this  not  what  Deleuze  and  Guattari meant when they decried the micro- fascisms of daily life and sung hymns 
to the ethos of the Earth?Indeed it is di*cult to imagine a global anarchism without resorting 
to something like Deleuze's plane of immanence, a vast ocean of multi-plicities expressing and virtualizing itself. And it is di*cult to imagine a 
Leninism of private life except in terms of the same old depravities of subjectivity: repression, lack, coercion, a voluntarism of the soul. Even 
Badiou's militant subject, the subject- soldier, is not exactly for the faint of heart.

The "anarchism at home, Leninism abroad" mythology holds power over the imagination. Still, it would be wise to recognize it for what it is, 
a myth, and proceed toward a more nuanced analysis. Having outlined the various kinds of cheating and forcing, the point is not to condemn 
cheating as reactionary and praise forcing as progressive, denigrating the former in favor of the latter. Although cheating often produces negative 
outcomes, political cheating may be necessary for tactical reasons, the best example being tactical uses of exploits.

25 Likewise, although forcing 

often produces positive outcomes, there too exist signi!cant drawbacks to forcing; for example, political forcing might obscure the nuances of a 

specific social milieu, and ethical forcing might diminish the intensity of local sites such as objects or individuals.

Anarchism  at  home  means  that  local  relations  are  more  or  less  on equal footing. Gone are the days of the autonomous cogito, the subject  
of potentiality, the ego, the patriarch, the superman, the genius hero, the militant-- and hence Badiou's inexhaustible desire to will some of them 
back into existence. Anarchism at home indicates the liberal notion that all people start on equal footing. By contrast, Leninism abroad means 
that social administration today is more or less political. Gone are the 

    213 26/08/2014   5:06:21 PM

!:4  The Generic
days of (forced) ethical principle or collective truth. Such social admin-istration is cheated rather than forced.

In other words, we dwell within cheated universality, not forced col-lectivity. This is why social administration today is protocological, since 
protocol facilitates the management of radical autonomy. The point is not so much to say that contemporary life is essentially ethical (and not political) or essentially digital (and not analog). The point is to describe an organic mixture that is both digito- analog and ethico- political. A single 
aspect may rise and achieve provisional dominance, while another falls. But later the fallen will rise again, changing the balance once more.

So in one sense we live in an ethical world, guided by computers as the consummate  ethical  chaperones.  But  it's  a  cheated,  reactionary  ethics: 
universality- without- collectivity,  analog  integration  without  identity,  a homogeneity of di)erence, neoliberalism, and protocol. Instead we need 
an ethical universe, a forced ethics: a universe of generic insuficientcy, a collectivity- without- universality, a human strike.

At the same time we live in a political world, but it's a cheated, reac-tionary politics. Choices proliferate to in!nity in public life. To live today 
is to choose, endlessly to choose. But the choices dissolve into the mere quasi choices of paper or plastic, Pepsi or Coke, Tweedledum or Tweedledee. Expanded to in!nity, choices grow less important, ultimately defanged of their potency as real decision. Instead we need a political universe, a 
forced politics. We need to realize Badiou's theory of points in a more direct sense, facilitating real decisions that have real consequences.

Push this button to stop war, push that button to stop paying taxes-- today we have the buttons, but not the outcomes. Any number of online 
petitions circulate, fabulously popular, but still the results are nil. People take to the streets in the millions, but still the results are nil. The structure itself has been circumvented.Although both the ethical and political modes are important today, 
both analog integration and digital distinction, a !nal fact remains. As circumvention,  cheating  itself  follows  the  logic  of  integration.  Cheating 
itself  tends  toward  the  logic  of  the  analog.  Thus,  if  indeed  the  world tends toward circumvention or cheating, then the world also tends toward 
the analog. This is one of the fundamental contradictions of our times.The contradiction can be described in terms of the tendential fall in 
the rate of digitality. Rooted in the standard model, the world is de!ned 

    214 26/08/2014   5:06:21 PM

  The Generic  !:5
as always already digital, yet it forever strives to undercut its own digi-tality by way of promoting cheating over forcing. The world abdicates  
its own digitality by softening its own distinction. With that in mind, it is perhaps quite bland and boring to assert that Laruelle is "against the 
digital," because the world is against the digital too! Yet their two vec- tors lead in two di)erent directions: the world promotes a dumbing and 
deadening of distinction, while Laruelle follows an impoverishment and withdrawal from distinction. The world territorializes into dull digitality 
and dull analogicity, while Laruelle refuses to make the dull distinction in the first place.

This is why the ethical regime (as cheating) is ultimately hegemonic today. Recall that old maxim about Judeo- Christian scripture, that the 
Bible  knows  no  tragedy,  only  drama.  Tragedy  requires  two  rights  in opposition, two absolutely equal claims to the law. Thus there is no tragedy in the Bible, because there are no competing claims to the law, only a singular appeal to truth.

Today  we  know  no  tragedy,  only  drama.  We  know  no  catastrophe, only management. Equal claims to the law, each locked in profound and 
irresolvable struggle, are absolutely foreign to contemporary sensibility. Ultimately we live in an ethical universe, an ethical universe powered by 
computers, those ethos contraptions. This is Baudrillard's "perfect crime" yet  again.  The  perfect  crime  is  perpetrated  when  the  ethical  wins  out 
over the political, management over event, drama over tragedy, cheating over forcing, analog over digital.

But a cheated ethics is not the same as a forced ethics. There is another side to the ethical as well, one that might well be redeemed. It is not a 
monaural ethics, the ethics of an impervious in!nite totality, but an eth-ics of absence, a drama in which nothing unfolds because there is literally 
nothing, and it is not subject to the Deleuzian foldings. This is the kind of ethical  universe  that Laruelle describes. It is a universe not entirely 
unrelated to those of Badiou and Deleuze, but one in which the elemen-tal terms of materialism and immanence are recombined in a new way.

Such is the style of legitimate or forced ethics, a collectivity without universality, a commons of those who have nothing in common, a generic 
!delity to the insuficientcy of matter.

    215 26/08/2014   5:06:21 PM

!"#$%&'()%#*+)*+#,*'--.%-)/+%0-'*1%
c o n c l u s i o n
From Digitality to Destiny

The basic claims of this book can be summarized using the one, the two, and the multiple. Various combinations and contrasts between these different modes constitute the universe both known and unknown.As prevent, being is insufficient, indistinct, indecisive, and is thus one. 
But the one is not one out of nostalgia for wholeness or the longing for an origin. The one is not simply a code word for spirit or essence. The one is 
described as it is through contrast to the known world: because the known world is de!ned through distinction, the one as non- world is understood 
as indistinction; because the known world is de!ned  through decision, the one as non- world is understood through indecision, and so on. The 
one is not a first cause nor an absolute reality; it is merely the static con-dition of preemption and prevention, a fundamentally prophylactic condition, in which presence and thought are made indistinct to each another. Laruelle's word for this is superposition; Deleuze's word is the virtual.

If the one is a prevent, the first and only event is "creation," the cre-ation of distinction, described here as the creation of the standard model. 
But this is a kind of creation that requires no divine intervention, no holy infrastructure, just as the quantum physicist actualizes a formerly superpositioned  quality  simply  by  measuring  it.  The  quantum  physicist,  in making a measurement, moves swiftly and easily from "the" one to "this" 
one, and in moving from the to this inaugurates a condition of relation between observer and observed.

Having been created, having been actualized, the world appears accord-ing to certain attributes. Recall that the one is without epithets, while the 

!:7

    217 26/08/2014   5:06:21 PM

!:8  Conclusion
actual world exists according to a series of basic epithets. These epithets were  de!ned  here  as  (")  the  a*rmative  transcendental  of  di)erential 
being, (-) the negative transcendental of dialectical being, (.) the a*r-mative  immanence  of  continuous  being,  and  (/)  the  negative  immanence of generic being. Admittedly there is nothing particularly special about these four epithets, and the suggestion is not that they are natural 
or transcendental laws of existence. Other observers will likely rejigger them  along  di)erent  lines,  or  resequence  them  according  to  di)erent 
historical evolutions, advents, and extinctions. These four simply appear as the most plausible modes of appropriation within the standard model 
as it appears today.Yet there are not simply two co- original aspects of the actual. There 
are not simply the two aspects of object and relation, of extension and thought,  of  bodies  and  languages.  In  fact  there  are  three  co- original 
aspects,  because  events  are  distinct  from  both  relations  and  entities. Hence  the  standard  model  encompasses  a  trio  of  attributes,  however 
they  may  be  understood:  object/relation/change,  matter/mind/becom-ing, body/language/event, thing/information/process.

Some  reduce  the  !nal  term  to  the  second  term,  suggesting  that  an event is simply a relation, suggesting that change is simply a way to conceive of how something alters its relation with other things or with itself. But although events may require relation, they are not simply reducible 
to relation. Ultimately events are also decisions, and thus an entirely dis-tinct attribute of being- given. For this reason Laruelle is quite persuasive 
when he labels philosophy a decision, when he suggests that the creation of the standard model, the creation of philosophy itself, is properly labeled 
a decisive event.The  non- standard  universe  is  approached  not  by  the  addition  of  a  
new decision, or the explosion of a new event, but rather by withholding the  original  decision.  Events  are  thus  rather  capacious,  for  there  are 
events that resemble relations, events that are properly called decisions, and  ultimately  events  that  are  indecisions  or  prevents.  In  Laruelle  the 
third type is called "determination" or "destiny."These and other claims are developed throughout the book. To punctuate the remarks, a series of fourteen theses were introduced, which are reproduced now in slightly less verbose language.

    218 26/08/2014   5:06:21 PM

  Conclusion  !:9

Thesis I. The media principle: the real is communicational, and the  

communicational is real.
Thesis II. Under the standard model, whatever given is riven.
Thesis III. As non- standard, the one is a prevent or virtualization.
Thesis IV. The one has no epithets.
Thesis V. The epithets of being are fourfold: di#erential, dialectical,  

continuous, and generic.
Thesis VI. The digital means the one dividing in two.
Thesis VII. The analog means the two coming together as one.
Thesis VIII. Being is an evental mode; it is coterminous with the event.
Thesis IX. Being is a computational mode; it is coterminous with the  

computational decision.
Thesis X. Non- standard philosophy is incompatible with exchange.
Thesis XI: Non- standard aesthetics means an aesthetics without  

representation, an aesthetics of the immanent rather than the  
transcendental.
Thesis XII. The political is two.
Thesis XIII. The ethical is one.
Thesis XIV. There is a tendential fall in the rate of digitality.

Following the path laid out in this book, it is impossible to think phi-losophy without thinking digitality. It is impossible to think philosophy 
without interrogating the zero, the one, the  two, the multiple, and the distinctions made among these terms.

Laruelle emerges as a key theorist today not simply because he allows us to think philosophy non- philosophically, but because through the non- 
standard  model  we  are  able  to  see  a  broader  picture  of  ontology  that includes both digital and nondigital in parallel. Thus it becomes possi- 
ble  to  be  "against  the  digital,"  as  clumsy  as  that  phrasing  may  sound,  not by inaugurating a new anti- digital binary, which would only restore 
the same old parallelity of digitality, but by way of the parallelism of deci-sion and the realization that the decision need not be made in the first 
place.This book has pro)ered the digital but has said relatively little about 
computers, software, networks, the Web, and the like. Is it guilty of false advertising? Admittedly the goal here is rather di)erent from books on 

    219 26/08/2014   5:06:21 PM

!!;  Conclusion
digital media. The goal here has not been to elucidate, promote, or dispar-age contemporary digital technologies, but rather to draft a simple prolegomenon for future writing on digitality and philosophy, using Laruelle as a kind of unwitting guide.

What  is  the  digital?  The  goal  here  was  not  to  settle  the  question. Rather, the goal was to show that the question has never adequately been 
posed.  The  digital  is  a  precondition  of  contemporary  life,  but,  more important, it is a precondition of the standard model as a whole.

Can there be  an ontology of the digital, or even a philosophy of it?  An attention to the specificities and vicissitudes of computers and other 
digital machines is paramount to such a project, just as an attention to the particularities of gesture and a)ect would necessarily guide any philosophical mediation on the subject. Nevertheless, in so doing, it is cru-cial to avoid the dual pitfalls of a "philosophy of the digital," in which  
the digital assumes the status of an object of study, like any other, to be wrapped  up  and  delivered  by  the  investigating  intellect  (which  itself 
remains uninterrogated), or even a "digitization of philosophy," in which the act of doing philosophy is subject to reinvention as something like 
"distributed intelligence," merely a marketing slogan, or even as my fore-bears might have called it "rhizomatic theory" or "schizo- culture."

The project here was of a rather di)erent nature. The intent was not  so much to appropriate one term to the other, not so much to apply the 
metaphysical as- structure and attempt to think digital- as- philosophy or philosophy- as- digital. Instead the intent was to apply the in- structure, a 
structure more suitable for generic immanence: digital- in- philosophy and philosophy- in- digital.  The  applicability  of  such  an  approach  to  future 
writing  on  those  other  things-- computers,  software,  networks,  or  the Web-- will make itself evident in di)erent ways and at di)erent times.

What was discovered during the course of this journey, in which both the digital and the analog have played a role, is that any exploration of 
the digital-- as cleaving, distinction, rivenness, or alienation-- will nec-essarily  place  new  demands  on  metaphysics,  because  metaphysics  will  
be  held  to  account,  summoned  to  explain  its  own  rivenness.  Here  we have answered that call not by explaining metaphysics in terms of more 
metaphysics,  an  approach  that  succeeds  in  forestalling  the  urgency  of  the question but ultimately explains very little. Instead metaphysics was 
described as an event and modal condition of the one. The one is, in this 

    220 26/08/2014   5:06:21 PM

  Conclusion  !!:
sense, the !nite a priori of the real, de!ned in the various ways previ-ously discussed including the principle of identity (a = a) and the principle of insufficient attribution or casting.By  discussing  all  of  this  under  the  name  of  Laruelle  and  his  signal 
contribution to contemporary thinking, I do not pretend to recast Laru-elle as a digital philosopher, or an analog one for that matter. A digital  
or analog Laruelle would make very little sense indeed, him being the theorist  who  has  most  avoided  distinction,  most  avoided  any  kind  of 
becoming- discrete.On the contrary, what Laruelle proves is that digitality is not destiny. 
He illustrates that the same kind of indecision shown to philosophy can also be shown to digitality. Digitality is much too sufficient to allow for 
any kind of destiny.So  if  it  is  destiny  we  seek,  or  the  generic,  or  love,  or  nature,  or  the  
common, we ought better to leave digitality behind (and analogy too). For the key to our destiny is not so much zeros and ones, but ones and 
twos, the one becoming two and the two returning as one. Only by re-fusing the suficientcy of the digital will we discover the promise of an 
immanent materialism.

    221 26/08/2014   5:06:22 PM

!"#$%&'()%#*+)*+#,*'--.%-)/+%0-'*1%Acknowledgments
Principal  writing  for  this  book  began  in  summer  -,""  and  concluded  in  early  October  -,"-.  Yet  early  inspiration  for  the  volume  dates  to  a  
few months earlier. On October -#, -,",, I conducted a seminar on the work of Franc,ois Laruelle in Brooklyn at the Public School New York. 
The resulting short text, "Franc,ois Laruelle, or The Secret," was included in a series of !ve pamphlets titled French Theory Today: An Introduction 
to  Possible  Futures  (Brooklyn:  Public  School  New  York,  -,"").  Let  me acknowledge and thank everyone who attended the seminar and those 
involved in the publication: editor Sarah Resnick, designers Kamomi Soli-dum and Anne Callahan, and contributors Taeyoon Choi, David Horvitz, 
Nicola Masciandaro, Jackson Moore, Dominic Pettman, Stephen Squibb, Eugene Thacker, and Prudence Whittlesey. My individual contributions 
to the Public School pamphlets were subsequently reorganized and pub-lished  in  French  as  Les  nouveaux  re'alistes:  Philosophie  et  postfordisme 
(Paris: Editions Le'o Scheer, -,"-). I am grateful to the Public School New York and Le'o Scheer for supporting this material and allowing it to reappear here, folded inside the Introduction.A first attempt to bridge Laruelle and digitality was presented at the 
Miguel  Abreu  Gallery  in  New  York  on  April  $,  -,"",  with  Laruelle  in attendance. These rudimentary thoughts were expanded into a lecture 
titled "Marxism without Digitality" given at Duke University on January -", -,"-, under the invitation of the Literature Program, as well as a presentation on January -/ in a colloquium at the University of Penn sylva-nia hosted by Avi Alpert and Danny Snelson. These initial explorations 

!!3

    223 26/08/2014   5:06:22 PM

!!4  Acknowledgments
were reorganized into a formal lecture titled "", Theses on the Digital"--  my  attempt  at  a  pun-- given  first  in  Erich  Ho"rl's  Medienwissenschaft  
colloquium  at  the  Ruhr- Universita"t  Bochum  in  Germany  on  May  #, -,"-,  and  then  again  under  the  invitation  of  Matthew  Fuller  at  Goldsmiths, University of London, on May "/. I thank these hosts for their support and for the feedback I received during my respective visits.

The  bulk  of  chapter  0 was  written  for  Briankle  Chang  and  Zachary McDowell at the University of Massachusetts Amherst, where I was in- 
vited to give a talk, originally titled "Deleuze and Computers," on Decem-ber -, -,"". The lecture was subsequently published as "Computers and 
the  Superfold" in  Deleuze  Studies $, no. / (November -,"-): 0".- -%. It reappears here in altered and expanded form.

Additional material was written in response to two invitations from Anthony Paul Smith, whom I recognize for his generosity and intellectual camaraderie. Chapter $ first appeared as "Laruelle, Anti- capitalist," in Laruelle and Non- philosophy, edited by John Mullarkey and Anthony 
Paul  Smith  (Edinburgh:  Edinburgh  University  Press,  -,"-):  "#"- -,%. Material from a second essay titled "The Autism of Reason," written for 
a special issue on Laruelle in the journal Angelaki "#, no. . (-,"/), has been incorporated into several di)erent chapters.

Chapter + was originally developed for two di)erent seminars orga-nized  in  part  by  Ed  Keller,  Nicola  Masciandaro,  Eugene  Thacker,  and 
Daniel Colucciello Barber, all of whom I acknowledge and thank for their friendship and boundless powers. As such the chapter incorporates material from "What Is a Hermeneutic Light?" in Leper Creativity: Cyclonope-dia  Symposium,  edited  by  Ed  Keller,  Nicola  Masciandaro,  and  Eugene 
Thacker (Brooklyn: Punctum Books, -,"-), "0#- +-, and "Rocket: Present at Every Point of the Remote," in Daniel Colucciello Barber et al., Dark 
Nights of the Universe (Miami: Name, -,".), %#- ",,.A part of chapter % first appeared as "Laruelle and Art" in continent. -, 
no.  /  (-,".):  -.,- .$.  I  especially  thank  Miguel  Abreu,  who  furnished  me with obscure texts without which the chapter would not have been 
possible.The opening section of chapter # first appeared as a review in Parrhesia "$ (-,".): ",-- 0.Portions of the fully drafted manuscript were again presented at the Public School New York during a class on Laruelle that Taeyoon Choi helped 

    224 26/08/2014   5:06:22 PM

  Acknowledgments  !!5
organize over four weekends in April -,".. These discussions were extremely useful, and I thank everyone who attended, in particular Jesse Newberg.

I  bene!ted  greatly  from  three  !ne  research  assistants  during  the prepa ration of the book: Shane Brennan, Jason LaRivie`re, and Hannah 
Zeavin. All three will recognize traces of themselves throughout the vol-ume, just as I do.

This  book  would  not  have  seen  the  light  of  day  without  Douglas Armato of the University of Minnesota Press and Cary Wolfe, the Posthumanities  book  series  editor.  I  thank  them  both  for  supporting  the project.  A  number  of  friends  and  colleagues  read  and  commented  on  
the penultimate draft of the manuscript. Among them I am particularly grateful to Daniel Colucciello Barber, Seb Franklin, Steven Shaviro, Jason 
Smith, Eugene  Thacker, and  McKenzie Wark. More than anyone I am grateful to Juliet Jacobson.

    225 26/08/2014   5:06:22 PM

Notes
P ? ? @A B ?
  1. See Carla Lonzi, "Let's Spit on Hegel," originally published in Revolt Femi-nize, and translated in Italian Feminist Thought: A Reader, eds. Paola Bono and 

Sandra Kemp, /,- 0# (Oxford and Cambridge: Basil Blackwell, "##").  2. In a rare moment of autobiographical  reflection, Laruelle cites two formative 
events from his youth, renouncing Hegel and watching an Antonioni !lm: "I wrote a master's thesis, `The Absence of Being,' after having seen a !lm, Antonioni's La 
Notte. At first I was going to write something on the young Hegel. But after I came back from vacation, having seen La Notte, and I told my supervisor, Paul Ricoeur, 
that I renounced Hegel! (Not that the young Hegel isn't interesting . . .) So yes, that !lm was also a turning point, curious things like that happen" (Franc,ois Laruelle, 
From Decision to Heresy: Experiments in Non- Standard Thought, ed. Robin Mackay [New York: Sequence, -,"-], .).

I C D ? E F G B D H E C
  1. Franc,ois  Laruelle,  "Obsce'nite'  de  la  philosophie,"  in  The'orie- Re'bellion:  Un ultimatum, ed. Gilles Grelet (Paris: L'Harmattan, -,,0), "-.. This and all subsequent  unattributed  translations  from  the  French  are  my  own.  I  have  not  been pedantic about returning to the French on every single occasion and will cite an 
English translation if it happens to be the way in which I first encountered the text.  2. Franc,ois  Laruelle,  The  Concept  of  Non- photography  /  Le  concept  de  non- 
photographie, trans. Robin Mackay (Falmouth, U.K., and New York: Urbanomic and Sequence, -,""), "-..
  3. Franc,ois Laruelle, "The Truth according to Hermes: Theorems on the Secret and Communication," trans. Alexander R. Galloway, Parrhesia # (-,",): "%- --. Parenthetical  citations  refer  to  this  edition,  giving  both  page  number  and  thesis  number. For a much longer examination of hermeneutics, di)erence, deconstruction, and  the  non- interpretable,  see  Laruelle's  essay  "Anti- Hermes,"  in  Text  und 

!!7

    227 26/08/2014   5:06:22 PM

!!8  Notes to Introduction
Interpretation: Deutsch- franzo"sische Debatte, ed. Philippe Forget, +%- ""/ (Munich: Fink, "#%/).
  4. See Quentin Meillassoux, After Finitude: An Essay on the Necessity of Contin-gency, trans. Ray Brassier (London: Continuum, -,,%).
  5. A note on the capitalization of terms like "the One" and "Being": It is not necessary to be overly fastidious about observing correct capitalization in every 
instance, and the reader should not extract anything particularly revelatory from such (uctuations, but su*ce it to say that I follow the convention, often seen in  
the translations of Heidegger and others, of using the capitalized "Being" to refer to the ontological status of things, which is to say the presence as such of things, 
while reserving the lowercase "being" (or more commonly "a being," "beings," or less ambiguously "entities") to refer to actually existing things. As Heidegger himself speci!ed, the use of the uppercase is nothing special and is not meant to bestow an aura of grandeur to these kinds of words. Indeed the capitalization of nouns 
happens di)erently in German than in English or French. As for Laruelle and the distinction  between "one" and  "the  One"-- the  former  a mundane  number or  a 
simple pronoun, the latter a more generic condition of identity-- I tend to deviate from the example set in Laruelle. He capitalizes the One, yet my preference, when 
not citing Laruelle directly, is to set it lowercase whenever possible. In my view a capitalized One  unnecessarily  in(ates  the  importance  of  the  concept,  ironically 
endowing  it  the  same  kind  of  transcendental  suficientcy  that  Laruelle  seeks  to withhold.
  6. In fact Laruelle performs surgery on phenomenology in an e)ort to resurrect it in non- standard form. So phenomenology's central conceit that Being is given 
over to the thought- world of man, establishing the fundamental structures of per-ception, projection, orientation, absorption, attention, and solicitude, is replaced 
by what Laruelle calls "vision- in- One." Vision- in- One refers essentially to a non- standard phenomenology. The basic logic of perception, projection, orientation, 
and so on is abstracted from its humanness and collapsed back into a structure of generic immanence. Thus Laruelle's vision is no longer a vision of the world, or a 
solicitude toward the other, but a vision within the one, a solicitude within imma-nence. Doing this also allows Laruelle to modify the classical ecstatic notion of 
existence as ex- ist (being out of). Quite cleverly Laruelle replaces ecstatic existence with the term in- One. The "ex" of exist becomes "in" and the "is- ness" becomes 
One: so not "exist" but "in- One."  7. In his robust critique of Laruelle, fueled by a skepticism toward the way in 
which  Laruelle  lumps  all  of  philosophy  into  a  single,  uniform  "decision,"  Ray Brassier traces the origins of the concept of philosophical decision to Heidegger. 
"Heidegger exempli!es the decisional structure Laruelle has in mind"; indeed, in Brassier's view, it would be apt "to characterize Laruelle's non- philosophy as the 
terminus ad quem of Heidegger's delimitation of metaphysics" (Ray Brassier, Nihil Unbound: Enlightenment and Extinction [New York: Palgrave Macmillan, -,,+], 
"-$,  "-+).  In  a  similar  vein,  Quentin  Meillassoux  has  critiqued  Laruelle  on  the grounds that Laruelle fails to escape the circle of correlationist  reflection: "If, like 

    228 26/08/2014   5:06:22 PM

  Notes to Introduction  !!9
Laruelle, you posit something outside the circle of objectivity-- in his case the Real outside `Philosophy'-- this Real will still be, according to me, in the circle of correlationism. Because it will be a posited Real: a Real posited by  reflection outside of representation" (Quentin Meillassoux, in Ray Brassier et al., "Speculative Realism," Collapse . [November -,,+]: .,+- //#, /"%).  8. See  Franc,ois  Laruelle,  Principes  de  la  non- philosophie  (Paris:  PUF,  "##$), 
and Franc,ois Laruelle, Philosophie non- standard: Ge'ne'rique, quantique, philo- !ction (Paris: Kime', -,",).

  9. John Mullarkey, Post- continental Philosophy: An Outline (London: Contin-uum, -,,$), "...
  10. Malabou has elaborated the concept of plasticity across a number of books. See, in particular, Catherine Malabou, Plasticity at the Dusk of Writing: Dialectic, 
Destruction, Deconstruction, trans. Carolyn Shread (New York: Columbia Univer-sity Press, -,",).
  11. Franc,ois Laruelle, "A Summary of Non- philosophy," Pli % ("###): ".%- /%, "/..  12. Although Laruelle does not often speak of digitality per se, he does indeed 

spend a great deal of time in Philosophie non- standard discussing discretization and particularity in quantum theory, including the distinction between particles 

and  waves.  Particles  and  waves  are  central  to  quantum  mechanics,  of  course,  but Laruelle also uses the terms to talk about the oscillations between discretization and generic continuity. In his view, particles or corpuscles are more a*liated with philosophy and its tendency toward decision and digitality, while waves or 
undulations  are  more  a*liated  with  the  generic  and  its  quantic  and  immanent qualities.
  13. The particular quotation in question is somewhat longer when viewed in context: "The splitting of a single whole and the cognition of its contradictory parts 
(see the quotation from Philo on Heraclitus at the beginning of Section III, `On Cognition,' in Lasalle's book on Heraclitus) is the essence (one of the `essentials,' 
one of the principal, if not the principal, characteristics or features) of dialectics" (V. I. Lenin, "On the Question of Dialectics," in Collected Works, vol. .% [Moscow: 
Progress Publishers, "#+-], .0#).  14. Alain  Badiou,  The  Century,  trans.  Alberto  Toscano  (Cambridge:  Polity, 
-,,+), $,.  15. Mao Tsetung, "A Dialectical Approach to Inner- Party Unity," trans. anonymous,  Selected  Works  of  Mao  Tsetung,  vol.  0  (Peking:  Foreign  Languages  Press, "#++). For an overview of some of the relevant vocabulary, see Li Kwok- sing, ed., A 
Glossary of Political Terms of the People's Republic of China, trans. Mary Lok (Hong Kong: Chinese University Press, "##0), ".#- /,, 0-"---.
  16. Ai Hengwu and Lin Qingshan, "`Dividing One into Two' and `Combining Two into One': Some Realization Gained in the Study of Chairman Mao's Thought 
in  Materialistic  Dialectics,"  trans.  anonymous,  Guangming  Daily,  May  -#,  "#$/, http://marxistphilosophy.org/ailin$/.pdf, ".
  17. See  Guy  Debord,  The  Society  of  the  Spectacle,  trans.  Donald  Nicholson- Smith (New York: Zone Books, "##/); Pierre Macherey, "Un se divise en deux," in 

    229 26/08/2014   5:06:22 PM

!3;  Notes to Introduction
Histoires de dinosaure: Faire de la philosophie, $BC6- $BBD, $/- +. (Paris: PUF, "###); Pierre Macherey, "Georges Bataille: Materialism Inverted," in The Object of Literature, trans. David Macey, ""-- ." (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, "##0), but particularly "-0- -+; Bruno Bosteels, "On the Subject of the Dialectic," in Think 
Again: Alain Badiou and the Future of Philosophy, ed. Peter Hallward, "0,- $/ (Lon-don: Continuum, -,,/); Bruno Bosteels, "One Divides into Two," in Badiou and 
Politics,  "",- 0$ (Durham, N.C.:  Duke  University Press,  -,"");  Alenka Zupanc^ic^, The Shortest Shadow: Nietzsche's Philosophy of the Two (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 
Press, -,,.); and Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, Commonwealth, -#,- #0 (Cam-bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, -,,#).

The work of Lardreau and Jambet represents a slightly di)erent development, irreducible to either analysis or synthesis. (See Guy Lardreau and Christian Jambet, L'Ange: Pour une cyne'ge'tique du semblant [Paris: E'ditions Grasset, "#+$].) In their fantastical hunt for an "angelic" Marxism, Lardreau and Jambet continued  
to !ght against the Hegelian synthesis, keeping a !delity to what they viewed as  the more Marxist moment of analysis (" 

! -). Yet, in arriving at the two, Lardreau and Jambet sought to elevate the two as such, preserving it as a kind of perpetual 

contradiction of opposites, immune to subsequent counter forces of synthesis, but nevertheless still susceptible to a higher, "angelic" realization. Lardreau and Jambet's  allegiance  to  the  two  produces  something  slightly  di)erent  from  struggle, rather  an  "eternal  dual  between  the  Master  and  a  Rebel  whose  independence  
from that Master can be asserted only through the radically disincarnate  !gure  of  the  Angel . . .  in  other  words,  a  radically  antidialectical  take  on  the  Leninist 
model of history as epic struggle" (Peter Starr, Logics of Failed Revolt: French The-ory after May 'CE [Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, "##0], #.). In such a 
revolutionary model, rooted in the angelic, not the dialectical, Lardreau and Jam-bet describe a mode of revolt that cannot simply (ip back into mastery, cannot 
simply be recuperated by authority. In fact Lardreau and Jambet also pitted them-selves against sexual liberation and the unfettering of desire, a somewhat counterintuitive move that would di)erentiate them from those operating in the wake of May "#$%, based on the assumption that desire and sexual liberation are too easily 
recuperated.After  the  failure  of  !gures  like  Yang  Xianzhen  and beyond  the  escapades  of 
Lardreau and Jambet, the  first coherent alternative to the Marxist hegemony  of two over one are the postwar followers of Spinoza, most notably Althusser, Macherey, and Deleuze. In Macherey, for example, as in Althusser, the basic choice is  not so much Marx or Hegel  but another choice entirely. The  true alternative  is 
Hegel ian- Marxism or Spinoza. In such an alternative Spinoza is held up as a mate-rialist, like Marx, but a materialist within whom the divisions and distinctions of 
the dialectic give way in favor of a pervasive immanence of nature.  18. Alain Badiou, The Rational Kernel of the Hegelian Dialectic: Translations, 
Introductions and Commentary on a Text by Zhang Shiying, trans. Tzuchien Tho (Melbourne: re.press, -,""), $,.
  19. Hardt and Negri, Commonwealth, -#/.

    230 26/08/2014   5:06:22 PM

  Notes to Chapter F  !3:
  20. Gilles Deleuze and Fe'lix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus, trans. Brian Mas-sumi (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, "#%+), 0.
  21. In his more recent writing, Laruelle has moved slightly closer to the com-puter while still remaining apart from it. Laruelle prefers to speak of a "matrix," 
which may  observe certain  physical or  mathematical principles but has little to  do with the modern computer. "I would rather talk about a generic matrix or even 
a collider, producer and detector of new thought particles, than about a compu- ter devoted to formal calculation" (-.), he notes in Philosophie non- standard, the 
large methodological centerpiece of a trio of late works-- Introduction aux sciences ge'ne'riques  (Paris:  Pe'tra,  -,,%),  Philosophie  non- standard,  and  Anti- Badiou:  Sur 

l'introduction  du  maoi"sme  dans  la  philosophie  (Paris:  Kime',  -,"")-- devoted  to, among  other things,  algebraic principles,  quantum  mechanics,  and  the  generic. 
"The generic matrix has certain aspects like the computer: a hardware side . . . and a software side from either the algebraic . . . or the philosophical. . . . But it functions  di)erently";  we  need  not  a  transcendental  machine,  he  writes,  alluding  to Turing's invention, but an "immanental" machine (Philosophie non- standard, -., -/).
  22. Laruelle, Introduction aux sciences ge'ne'riques, -%.  23. Franc,ois Laruelle, "L'ordinateur transcendantal: Une utopie non- philosophique," 
in Homo ex machina (Paris: L'Harmattan, -,,0), "..
" .   TI ?   O C ?   D H J H F ? K   H C   TL E
  1. Alain Badiou, Being and Event, trans. Oliver Feltham (New York: Contin-uum, -,,0), -/.

  2. Ibid., -..  3. Ibid.
  4. Indeed the claim "The one is not" eventually leads Badiou to an ontology of the void. The important aspect of Badiou's intervention is that he solidly con!gures the one as "merely" a structure or operation of being, what he calls the "count- as- one." Badiou's one is thus not a land beyond, not a pseudonym for God, and  
not some kind transcendental state of pre- being. "What has to be declared is that the one, which is not, solely exists as operation. In other words: there is no one per 
se, only the count- as- one. The one, being an operation, is never a presentation" (ibid., -/).
  5. Alain Badiou, Deleuze: The Clamor of Being, trans. Louise Burchill (Min-neapolis: University of Minnesota Press, -,,,), 0-.
  6. The  violence  is  most  spectacular  during  Badiou's  discussion of  Deleuze's notion of univocity, which he likens to a suspended "simulacra" of being. "Strangely, 
this consequence has a Platonic, or even Neoplatonic air to it," Badiou concludes tartly. "Deleuzianism is fundamentally a Platonism with a di)erent accentuation" 
(Badiou, Deleuze, -$). The irony, of course, is that  Deleuze had long  construed himself as the most extreme form of anti- Platonist, by way of a total rejection of 
the dialectic, idealism, and classical metaphysics in general, making him essen-tially incompatible with Plato.
  7. Badiou, Deleuze, +%.

    231 26/08/2014   5:06:22 PM

!3!  Notes to Chapter F
  8. Gilles  Deleuze,  Di#erence  and  Repetition,  trans.  Paul  Patton  (New  York: Columbia University Press, "##/), .0, .$.
  9. Ibid., .,/.  10. ". . . one Being and only for all forms and all times, a single instance for all 
that exists, a single phantom for all the living, a single voice for every hum of voices and every drop of water in the sea" (Gilles Deleuze, The Logic of Sense, trans. Mark 
Lester  [New  York:  Columbia  University  Press,  "##,],  "%,).  This  chapter  of  The Logic of Sense also illustrates why it would not be entirely correct to label Deleuze's 
defense of univocity a "monism." He says clearly that there is not one and the same being.  He  endorses  the  opposite  position, in  fact,  that  there  is  a multiplicity  of  
di)erent beings. Univocity does not state that there is one substance, or that there is, ultimately, a single thing in which Being consists. So while Deleuze proposes a 
multiplicity of pure becoming, what he delightfully calls "the primary order which grumbles  beneath"  ("-0),  he  also  states  that  this  multiplicity  carries  across  its  
many permutations the same one sense. Univocity thus designates an identity of commonality between being's events and being's sense. On this score The Logic  
of Sense is a much more radical work of ontology than even Di#erence and Repeti-tion,  because  it  demonstrates  that  the  theory  of  sense  is  ultimately  a  theory  of 
being, that being is a vocalization or expression, that "Being is Voice" ("+#). It dem-onstrates why, in order to talk about being, Deleuze felt obligated to talk about 
language.  11. Deleuze, The Logic of Sense, "%,.
  12. To be sure, Laruelle's one is not "extra" in the sense of being higher or more external than Being: "In reality it is not the One that is separated from Being, it is 
Being that is separated from the One. . . . We do not exit from philosophy into the One; we describe the vision- in- One of philosophy" (Franc,ois Laruelle, Philosophies 

of Di#erence: A Critical Introduction to Non- philosophy, trans. Rocco Gangle [Lon-don: Continuum, -,",], "00). Laruelle's one should also not be confused with the 
All, because  the  one  is  !nite and  insufficient,  while  the  All  typically  refers to  a totality, an in!nity, a multiplicity, or some other kind of sufficient whole.
  13. Laruelle, "A Summary of Non- philosophy, "/".  14. There is, of course, an active tradition within intellectual history of categorizing Hegel as the consummate thinker of immanence. Badiou sums it up nicely: "All of  Hegel  can be  found in the  following: the  `still- more' is immanent  to  the 
`already'; everything that is, is already `still- more'" (Badiou, Being and Event, "$-). Although cognizant of this alternate tradition, I think it necessary to di)erentiate 
between, shall we say, weak and strong theories of immanence. Philosophies of weak immanence (here Hegel) give allowance to excess or supplement, corralling 
the "still more" back into the essence of what "already" is. By contrast, strong theo-ries of immanence (Laruelle) give no quarter to the "still more." The "still more" is 
by de!nition ecstatic; it must step beyond and exceed the entity whatsoever it is. Within this more radical conception of immanence-- "radical" in Laruelle's lexicon meaning roughly "more fully determined"-- nothing ever has to go outside itself in order to realize itself. That being the core motto of Hegelianism, I think it 

    232 26/08/2014   5:06:22 PM

  Notes to Chapter F  !33
un!tting to label Hegel a thinker of immanence, at least in the stronger or more radical variety espoused by Laruelle.
  15. See, for example, Laruelle, Principes de la non- philosophie, $.  16. Immanence is territory that Laruelle seeks to win for himself. In a number 
of places he discusses the tradition of philosophical immanence only to show how none of the existing philosophies of immanence is adequate. Michel Henry is most 
laudable in Laruelle's eyes, but even Henry is not rigorous enough. See, for exam-ple, the section titled "Me'saventures de l'immanence (de Spinoza a` M. Henry)" in 
Franc,ois  Laruelle,  Introduction  au  non- marxisme  (Paris:  PUF,  -,,,),  /,- /.;  or Laruelle's "Re'ponse a` Deleuze" in Franc,ois Laruelle, La non- philosophie des contemporains (Paris: Kime', "##0), /#- +%, in which Laruelle responds rather forcefully to a small but friendly footnote that mentions him in What Is Philosophy? one of 
Deleuze's last books (with Guattari).  17. Jacques Lacan, On Feminine Sexuality: The Limits of Love and Knowledge-- The 
Seminar of Jacques Lacan, Book XX, trans. Bruce Fink (New York: Norton, "##%), /+.  18. Ibid.
  19. Ibid.  20. Ibid., emphasis added.
  21. Whitehead calls this "the bifurcation of nature." See Alfred North White-head, The Concept of Nature (New York: Prometheus, -,,/).
  22. Laruelle, "The Truth according to Hermes," --.  23. Badiou, Deleuze, +%.
  24. Luce Irigaray, The Forgetting of Air in Martin Heidegger, trans. Mary Beth Mader (Austin: University of Texas Press, "###), "+, -.
  25. Alfred North Whitehead, Process and Reality: An Essay in Cosmology (New York: Free Press, "#+%), "#.
  26. See, for example, Laruelle, Principes de la non- philosophie, ".  27. Laruelle, Introduction aux sciences ge'ne'riques, -0, emphasis removed.
  28. In such contexts it is easy to see why Deleuze was drawn to biological prin-ciples of asexual reproduction such as cutting, grafting, cloning, and rhizomatic 
propagation.  Just  as  Laruelle's  clone  is  what  we  might  call  "riven- without- rivenness,"  the  rhizome  of  Deleuze  and  Guattari  propagates  only  via  a  kind  of 
"blind" or nonsynthetic repetition. See the opening sections of Deleuze and Guat-tari, A Thousand Plateaus.
  29. Laruelle, Philosophie non- standard, #0.  30. Michel  Henry,  The  Essence  of  Manifestation,  trans.  Girard  Etzkorn  (The 
Hague: Nijho), "#+.), +"#.  31. Immanuel Kant, Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics That Can Qualify 
as a Science, trans. Paul Carus (Chicago: Open Court, "#,-), %0.  32. Martin  Heidegger,  "The  Principle  of  Identity,"  in  Identity  and  Di#erence, 
trans. Joan Stambaugh (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, "#$#), .".  33. Martin  Heidegger,  "Time  and  Being,"  in  On  Time  and  Being,  trans.  Joan 
Stambaugh (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, "#+-), "#.

    233 26/08/2014   5:06:22 PM

!34  Notes to Chapter F
  34. Eugene  Thacker,  In  the  Dust  of  This  Planet:  Horror  of  Philosophy,  Vol.  $ (Winchester, UK: Zero Books, -,""), 0, $. See also Eugene Thacker, "The Insomnia 
of Thought," Black Annals (forthcoming).  35. In no way should the real be understood as some sort of primitive, cosmological soup.  In this book words like  equiprimorder, co- original, or prior should carry in the reader's ear absolutely no connotation of a past time in which things 
were simpler and humans existed in a state of nature, nor anything like a brute Darwinism in which primitive forces !ght and evolve from simpler states to more 
advanced states. And when we speak of oneness it is not out of romanticism or nostalgia for some  lost state of integrity or  completeness, but simply through  a 
reversal of the rivenness of being. Following apophatic reason: if being is digital, the one must be analog; if being is transcendental, the one must be immanent. 
Indeed, chapter ", shows how both the digital and the analog are equally interest-ing and useful. These protestations, of course, may not dispel such interpretations, 
just as Heidegger's unambiguous protestations about the non- normative nature of his Verfallen (falling, lapsing, slouching, ensnarement) are thoroughly unconvincing to me. But at least the protestations are on the record.  36. Deleuze, Di#erence and Repetition, .+.

- .   TI ?   S DA C F A ? F   M E F ? M
  1. For  an examination of  this  dynamic see,  in  particular, Kristin  Ross,  Fast Cars,  Clean  Bodies:  Decolonization  and  the  Reordering  of  French  Culture  (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, "##$).  2. Franc,ois  Laruelle,  "Du  noir  univers:  Dans  les fondations  humaines de  la 
couleur," La De'cision philosophique 0 (April "#%%): ",+- "-, """.  3. Laruelle, Principes de la non- philosophie, -%.
  4. A number of contemporaries are exploring the relationship between phi-losophy and autism. See, in particular, Erin Manning, "The Shape of Enthusiasm," 
Parallax "+, no. - (-,""): %/- ",#, and Steven Shaviro, The Universe of Things: On Speculative  Realism  (Minneapolis:  University  of  Minnesota  Press,  -,"/).  Some 
thinkers and scientists within disability studies are endorsing a model of "neuro- diversity" in which autism is not considered de!cient or necessarily disabling but 
rather simply one neurological con!guration among others. By contrast the non- standard  method  would  suggest  a  model  more  along  the  lines  of  "neuro- 
commonality" or "generic thought."  5. Such a method is referred to as apophatic or privative reason, or alternately 
as  the  via  negativa.  Laruelle  himself  does  not  shun  the  via  negativa  as  a  viable methodology: radical immanence "is de!ned negatively through an exclusion of 
ecstatic or phenomenological distance" (Laruelle, Philosophie non- standard, "0#).  6. Laruelle, Introduction au non- marxisme, $#.

  7. Laruelle  himself  has  not  received  enough  credit  for  what  is  perhaps  the most ambitious aspect of his entire project: a uni!ed theory to fuse science and 
philosophy. See, in particular, the second chapter of Principes de la non- philosophie.A more recent work, Philosophie non- standard, devoted to what Laruelle calls a 
"generic science," also takes up this task in earnest. Generic science comes from a 

    234 26/08/2014   5:06:22 PM

  Notes to Chapter G  !35
series of convictions: "(") that philosophy's critique of representation during the Twentieth Century is still an un!nished project, and that philosophy itself is incapable of realizing this critique as long as it elevates one science to a fundamental methodological position (Newton for Kant, number theory for Husserl, set theory 
for Badiou), (-) that the point of science in general is not to generate the most virtuosic critique of philosophy, but that science in general carries with it an in- 
di)erence toward philosophy, a prior- priority [avant- priorite'] capable of (under)determining critique, (.) in particular that, among the sciences, historical materialism, psychoanalysis,  and  quantum  mechanics  are  the  closest  to  establishing  a Generic  Science  of  philosophy  itself . . . ,  (/)  that  the  critique  of  philosophy,  or 
criticism more broadly construed as our contemporaries practice it, must change its nature and must no longer be `first critique,' but rather lined up behind a fore- 
first  science  [science  avant- premie`re]"  (Laruelle,  Philosophie  non- standard,  "%0). Although some might be skeptical of the way in which Laruelle has begun to talk 

about quantum mechanics in recent books, it's best to think of his sudden pen-chant for twentieth- century physics in terms of a larger relationship between scientific  formalism  and  philosophical  rationalism.  As  he  suggests,  some  sort  of generic science is at the core of all inventive thought: "Husserl needed the science 
of  psychology  as  a  waypoint  toward  the  autonomy  of  the  transcendental,  Kant needed newtonian physics as passage toward the a priori and the transcendental, 
Heidegger needed ontological di)erence to get to Ereignis, Plato needed mathe-matics to get to philosophy. Today we need quantum physics and particularly its 
use of imaginary numbers in order to pass on to the generic" (Laruelle, Philosophie non- standard, -0+- 0%). Laruelle has thus not anointed quantum mechanics as some 
sort of special meta- discourse able to speak in the voice of being. Rather, quantum theory is merely a particularly convenient way to obtain a generic science, in part 
because quantum theory already speaks the language of the generic (via concepts like non- commutativity or superposition). Still, quantum theory remains just as 
"philosophical" as philosophy itself, and thus requires its own non- standard paral-lel (the task of Philosophie non- standard).
  8. Laruelle, Philosophie non- standard, "+/.  9. See,  for  instance,  chapter  "$  of  Badiou,  Being  and  Event,  "+.- ++.  Brassier  
has  also  suggested  a  useful  mixture  of  Badiou  and  Laruelle:  "The  full- force  of Badiou's ontological thesis-- viz., that being is nothing-- is only realized when it  
is supplemented by the transcendental hypothesis which we have extracted from Laruelle. . . .  We  will  distinguish  the  void  as  unilateral  duality  from  the  being- 
nothing in which it is rooted as indivisible zero. Where dialectics proceeds by the One dividing into two, unilateralization consists in the two of the void e)ectuating 
the zero of being- nothing. Non- dialectical negation is this `voiding' and the logic of its e)ectuation is that of the unilateral duality, the irreversible cut" (Brassier, 

Nihil Unbound, "/%).  10. See Henry, The Essence of Manifestation, //, /0, /".
  11. The fourfold schema described here is not meant to duplicate or emulate Laruelle's own "four discourses of the One," consisting of the Master, the Stranger, 

    235 26/08/2014   5:06:22 PM

!36  Notes to Chapter G
Life, and the Rebel. The first two he describes in terms of philosophy and non- philosophy, while the  second two are attached to the names Michel Henry  and 
Gilles Grelet respectively. "(") The philosopher or the Master is complacent in the World and is himself a World . . . ; (-) The Stranger . . . is that clone of being- in- 
struggle- with- the- World . . . ; (.) Life is the refusal and contempt for the World . . . and in this way Life distinguishes itself from the World that it does not want to 

know; (/) The Rebel is in- hatred of the World" (Franc,ois Laruelle, Struggle and Utopia  at  the  End  Times  of  Philosophy,  trans.  Drew  S.  Burk  and  Anthony  Paul 
Smith  [Minneapolis:  Univocal,  -,"-],  "%").  Although  there  is  some  super!cial resemblance between the Master and di)erential being or the Rebel and dialectical 
being, it would be a mistake to compare the two models because they derive from di)erent premises and thus result in incompatible maps.
  12. Laruelle, Principes de la non- philosophie, 0. See also +, /0, and 0-.  13. G. W. F. Hegel, Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences: Part One, The Science of Logic, trans. William Wallace (Oxford: Oxford University Press, "#+0), ""0.  14. Deleuze, The Logic of Sense, 0..
  15. Ibid., "-0.  16. Alain Badiou, Manifesto for Philosophy, trans. Norman Madarasz (Albany: 
State University of New York Press, "###), ",%- #.  17. Franc,ois Laruelle, Introduction aux sciences ge'ne'riques (Paris: Pe'tra, -,,%), 
.#, /,. Such a litany is what others refer to as "anti- philosophy." In his translator's introduction to Badiou's  Ethics, Peter Hallward provides a useful description of 
anti- philosophy,  starting  with  his  own  list  of  !gures:  "Saint  Paul's  `discourse  of  Life' (as opposed to the pretensions of Greek philosophy); Pascal's charite' (against 
rational  and  institutional  intellect);  Rousseau's  sincerity  (against  the  science  of Voltaire and the Encyclope'distes); Kierkegaard's redemptive choice (against Hegel's 
synthe sis);  Nietzsche's  `active'  force  (against  the  `theoretical'  ressentiment  of  the philosopher- priest); the early Wittgenstein's inarticulable, otherworldly Meaning 
(against  speculative  idealism);  Heidegger's  letting- be  (against  the  technocratic manipulation of beings)-- these are all so many  e)orts to set an ine)able Value 
against mere theory, a genuine Act against the feeble abstractions of philosophy (see Alain Badiou, Saint Paul [Paris: PUF, "##+], $-). Showing here prevails over 
saying: anti- philosophy reveals, where philosophy explains. Every `anti- philosophical act consists of letting become apparent "what there is", to the degree that "what 

there is" is precisely that which no proposition is able to say' (Alain Badiou, `Silence, solipsisme, saintete'' [BARCA ! Poe'sie, Politique, Psychanalyse . ("##/): ".- 0.], "+)" 
(Peter Hallward in Alain Badiou, Ethics: An Essay on the Understanding of Evil, trans. Peter Hallward [London: Verso, -,,"], xxxix- xl).
  18. Laruelle, Introduction aux sciences ge'ne'riques, 0#- $,, see also pages "-0- -+ for a longer discussion of the one and the two. It is technically incorrect and certainly overly simplistic to assert that Laruelle is "against the two" or "for the one." Admittedly Laruelle thinks that philosophy generally enforces a "law of the two" 
based in bifurcation,  reflection, auto- position, etc. Yet non- philosophy cannot be 

    236 26/08/2014   5:06:22 PM

  Notes to Chapter G  !37
understood  as  a  simple  rejection  of  the  two  and  a  return  to  the  one.  Laruelle describes non- philosophy as a theory of the immanent one and the unilateral two. 
This preserves a notion of the one that is not transcendental, and a notion of the two that is not representational.

In fact, a useful conversation could be staged here between Laruelle and Jacques Rancie`re around Rancie`re's concept of partage (distribution, sharing, or parceling 
out; see Jacques Rancie`re, Le partage du sensible: esthe'tique et politique [Paris: La Fabrique, -,,,], published in English as The Politics of Aesthetics: The Distribution 
of  the  Sensible,  trans.  Gabriel  Rockhill  [New  York:  Continuum,  -,,/]).  Contra Rancie`re, Laruelle does not speak of distributions or arrangements, at least not in 
the way they are typically discussed. Rather, he impoverishes the transcendental core of partage and renders it generic, unilateral, and immanent: "The radically 
unequal  or  complimentary  distribution  is  what  we  call  unilateral,  . . . [It's]  an immanence without exception, without any kind of distribution or parcelling out 
[partage]" (Laruelle, Philosophie non- standard, "+-). Thus, in the wake of Laruelle a number of things become possible. One is able, for the first time in recent memory, to cease thinking about distributed networks and begin thinking about unilat-eral networks. One is able to cease contemplating the many distributions of the 
sensible and begin thinking the compression of the sensible.  19. Ibid., "0,.
  20. Laruelle, Principes de la non- philosophie, --+, --%. One particularly interest-ing demonstration of this method of non- philosophical cloning is Laruelle's short, 

experimental piece "Variations on a Theme in Heidegger." Starting from one of  the most important and often- quoted passages in Heidegger's Being and Time, the 
section in which Heidegger describes the ontic distinctiveness of Dasein in terms of it being ontological, Laruelle repeats and modulates Heidegger's language through 
sixteen successive paragraphs, like a musician circling back through various motifs, until  Heidegger's  claims  become  more  or  less  globally  transformed  into  non- 
philosophy. As Laruelle summarizes at the end, "Two series of variations divide up the Philosophical Decision and open it up to `non- philosophy.' On the one hand, 
variations on the circle or the circle as variation: Being- as- being, Saying- as- said, Logos- as- di)ere(a)nce, Desire- as- lack, Everydayness- as- subject and even Di)erence- 

as- One. . . . And on the other hand, in e)ect, variations that a)ect the ontical itself, either as being, as Other, as lack, as substitute-- in short, as One. . . . When at last 
man-- through the Vision- in- the- One that he `is,' prior to all comprehension of Being-- sees the circle of circles pass by again, it's so he can glimpse it as it passes 
outside and under the One, above and even `over' him, like a cloud over the moon, or like the sun of reason over the inalterable opacity of man. It is then that philosophy (oats, indi)erent, through the air of `non- philosophy'" (Franc,ois Laruelle, "Variations sur en the`me de Heidegger," La De'cision philosophique " [May "#%+]: 
%$- #/, #.- #/).  21. Laruelle, Principes de la non- philosophie, -+.. Indeed, during his summary of 
the axioms and theorems of non- philosophy, Laruelle combines all of the following 

    237 26/08/2014   5:06:23 PM

!38  Notes to Chapter G
!gures into a unilateralized, transcendental identity: Plato, Aristotle, Leibniz, Kant, Fichte, Marx, Heidegger, Wittgenstein, and Go"del (ibid., -+$- ++).
  22. Laruelle, Philosophie non- standard, -,$.  23. Franc,ois  Laruelle,  The  Concept  of  Non- photography  /  Le  concept  de  non- 
photographie, trans. Robin Mackay (Falmouth, U.K., and New York: Urbanomic and Sequence, -,""), ##.
  24. Laruelle  himself  suggests  the  n  =  $  formula  and  others  like  it  including  A + A = A. "In immanence, one no longer distinguishes between the One and the 
Multiple, there is no longer anything but n = ", and the Multiple- without- All. No manifold watched over by a horizon, in (ight or in progress: everywhere a true 

chaos of (oating or inconsistent determinations. . . . Between Identity and Multi-plicity, no synthesis by a third term . . ." (Laruelle, The Concept of Non- photography, 
#%- ##).These formulae illustrate the principle of idempotence. From the Latin meaning 

"having the same power" or "the capacity of being the same," an operation is idem-potent when it produces a result of the same. For example, addition is idempotent 
with reference to zero because $ + @ = $, 5 + @ = 5, etc. "Idempotence is essentially a superposition (" + " = " or A + A = A), a summation that is almost barren, an 
addition that produces the same kind of result or preserves its own truth. We may thus label it a non- ecstatic superposition" (Laruelle, Philosophie non- standard, /+"; 
for idempotence see also -#/- .,-).Regarding such formulae it is important to remember that in Laruelle "and" 
typically  means  "equals."  Just  as  Deleuze  tends  to  recast  negative  operations  as a*rmative or creative, Laruelle recasts additive operations as revelations of identity or equality. Hence in Laruelle the expression "this and that" really means "this is that." The idempotent formula encapsulates it well: $ + $ = $ is simply a more 
verbose way of stating $ = $. Likewise for vector or wave addition the addition of two waves simply produces a new wave. This is one of the key ways in which Laruelle di)ers from Deleuze. Recall Deleuze's discussion of the conjunctive series des-ignated as "and, and, . . ." The conjunctive series is di)erent from Laruelle's idempotent  formula  in  two  important  ways.  First,  Deleuze  eliminates  the  algebraic nature of the formula by eliminating the two sides held in balance by an equals 
sign. Second, Deleuze extends the expression o) into the distance, allowing the proliferation of addition to continue unfettered. (Such is sufficient proof, according to Laruelle, of Deleuze's ultimate inability to think immanence fully.) In other words, Deleuze's ontology is a calculus, that is, di)erential units summed together 
while  approaching  in!nity.  Yet  Laruelle's  ontology  is  an  algebra,  that  is,  !nite determinations  of  identity.  Deleuze  seeks  the  in!nite  expression  of  di)erence, 
while Laruelle the !nite determination of equality. See, inter alia, Laruelle, Philoso-phie non- standard, .,-- ..
  25. Laruelle, The Concept of Non- photography, ",.  26. From comments made by Laruelle during a panel discussion at Miguel Abreu 

Gallery, New York, N.Y., April  $, -,"". In his late work, particularly  Philosophie non- standard, Laruelle spends considerable time examining quantum mechanics 

    238 26/08/2014   5:06:23 PM

  Notes to Chapter H  !39
and the scientific theories of particles, waves, superposition, non- commutativity, and complementarity.

. .   TI ?   D H N H DA M
  1. Although digitality has received less attention, analogy is indeed a peren-nial theme in Western thought. In one of the more accomplished recent studies of 

philosophy and culture, Kaja Silverman begins from the perspective of analogy rather than di)erence, alterity, negation, or other themes more common to critical 
theory (see Kaja Silverman, Flesh of My Flesh [Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, -,,#]). Unlike Laruelle, Silverman considers analogy more important than 
identity,  and  she  does  us  a  great  service  in  parsing  the  many  !ne  distinctions among analogy, metaphor, correspondence, and resemblance (see, in particular, 
her chapter + ["$%- --"]). Yet like Laruelle, Silverman recognizes the importance of finitude  compared  to  the  more  abstract  or  idealist  postures  of  transcendental 
metaphysics:  "Finitude  is  the  most  capacious  and  enabling  of  the  attributes  we share with others, because unlike the particular way in which each of us looks, 
thinks, walks, and speaks, that connects us to a few other beings, [finitude] con-nects us to every other being. Since finitude marks the point where we end and 
others begin, spatially and temporally, it is also what makes room for them-- and acknowledging these limits allows us to experience the expansiveness for which 
we yearn, because it gives us a powerful sense of our emplacement within a larger Whole" (/).
  2. A notorious challenge for translators, Leonardo Tara'n renders the passage modestly  but  appealingly  as  "for  the  same  thing  can be  thought  and  can exist" 
(Parmenides: A Text with Translation, Commentary, and Critical Essays [Princeton: Princeton University Press, "#$0], frag. ., line "). Alternate versions by other translators include "For to think and to be is one and the same thing," or "Thinking and Being  are  the  same  thing,"  or  even simply  "Non- Being  is  inconceivable,"  which 
despite its awkwardness would certainly follow from the claims made by Parme-nides in fragment -.
  3. Bernard Stiegler, For a New Critique of Political Economy, trans. Daniel Ross (Cambridge: Polity Press, -,",), ."- .-, ...
  4. Franc,ois Laruelle, Le principe de minorite' (Paris: Aubier, "#%"), 0.  5. Laruelle discusses Fichte on a number of occasions, particularly his treatment  of  the  "I"  (the  Self)  and  the  relation  "I  =  I"  (Self  =  Self)  only  to  dismiss Fichte's "I" as an "intellectual intuition" unable to achieve true immanence within 
the  real.  See,  for  example,  Laruelle,  Principes  de  la  non- philosophie,  ",0- $  and  "$%- %0.
  6. Recall that tautology, although merely useless for many, is more malevolent for  others,  symptomatic  of  the  depraved  circularity  of  modern  life.  Marx,  for 
example, begins his explication of the general formula for capital with the tauto-logical expression M- M, or money- money, a contracted form of the C- M- C- M- 
C- M  chain  (commodity- money- etc.).  This  allows  him  to  inject  the  concept  of surplus into the chain, resulting in a cycle of M to M' (money to money prime) 

    239 26/08/2014   5:06:23 PM

!4;  Notes to Chapter H
where money is "not spent . . . [but] advanced" (Karl Marx, Capital, vol. $: A Cri-tique of Political Economy, trans. Ben Fowkes [London: Penguin, "#+$], -/#). Later, 
theorists like Jean Baudrillard and Guy Debord would lament the closed circuits  of society and culture precisely for their seemingly impervious, tautological, and 
therefore repressive e)ects. "The spectacle is essentially tautological, for the sim- ple reason that its means and its ends are identical" (Guy Debord, The Society of 
the Spectacle, trans. Donald Nicholson- Smith [New York: Zone Books, "##/], "0 [para.  ".]).  Laruelle,  for  his  part,  is  content  to  shrug  o)  such  nefarious  connotations. Immanence is too seductive a prize for him. Laruelle maintains that the tautological  identity  formula  (viz.  One- in- One)  is  the  only  true  expression  of 
immanence.  7. Gilles  Deleuze,  Cinema  $:  The  Movement- Image,  trans.  Hugh  Tomlinson 
and Barbara Habberjam (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, "#%$), ".  8. Here,  as  elsewhere,  Deleuze  takes  inspiration from Henri  Bergson.  Contrasting ancient and modern scientific approaches, Bergson writes that "ancient science thinks it knows its object sufficiently when it has noted of it some privileged  moments,  whereas  modern  science  considers  the  object  at  any  moment whatever." Time is the key factor, because "modern science must be de!ned pre- 
eminently  by  its aspiration to  take time  as  an independent  variable." See  Henri Bergson, Creative Evolution, trans. Arthur Mitchell (Mineola, N.Y.: Dover, "##%), 
..,, ..$, emphasis removed.  9. The chief avatar of such  an image regime, at least in  Cinema 5, is Hans- 
Ju"rgen Syberberg. Deleuze describes "a new computer and cybernetic race, autom-ata of computation and thought, automata with controls and feedback" (-$/- $0), 
and singles out the "disingenuous" nature of electronic images: "a new image can arise from any point whatever of the preceding image" (Gilles Deleuze, Cinema 5: 
The Time- Image, trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Robert Galeta [Minneapolis: Uni-versity of Minnesota Press, "#%#], -$/- $0).
  10. To this end, E'lie During, in his book Faux raccords: La coexistence des images (Arles: Actes Sud, -,",), proposes the intriguing concept of the "volume- image."
  11. See Deleuze, Cinema $, "".  12. Ibid., """.
  13. Deleuze, Cinema 5, ",,, emphasis removed.  14. Ibid., ",".
  15. Laruelle, "Du noir univers," ""-.  16. McKenzie  Wark's  term  for  the  reverse  panopticon  is  transopticon.  See  
McKenzie Wark, Telesthesia: Communication, Culture and Class (Cambridge: Pol-ity Press, -,".), -,+ and passim. An early instance of the reverse panopticon-- in 
the form of a circular photographic studio-- was built by Franc,ois Wille`me in Paris in the early "%$,s.
  17. Laruelle is essentially  an illiberal thinker in  that he  does not cede  center stage to the unfettered freedoms of an empowered individual. Consider his discussion of the generic as ful!llment. "The generic means `ful!llment,' just as we might speak of a `ful!llment of the Law'" (Laruelle, Philosophie non- standard, "/" 

    240 26/08/2014   5:06:23 PM

  Notes to Chapter I  !4:
and repeated on /-.). By alluding to Romans ".:%- ",, "Whoever loves others has ful!lled the law," Laruelle means to indicate that the generic entails a determination of elemental conditions, not a liberation from the constraints of those condi-tions.  "Whoever  loves  others  has  ful!lled  the  law"  means  essentially:  whoever 
commits to loving the other has ful!lled the generic determination that "all are lovable" or "love is the radical medium of all." One must  ful!ll the generic law, 
therefore, not (ee from it. One must force the generic, not liberate the transcen-dental, as liberal thinkers suggest.

This gets to the core of the distinction between a promiscuous or liberal ontol-ogy  and  a  prophylactic  or  radical  ontology.  The  liberal  seeks  a  state  of  natural 
freedom with a minimum of laws, while the radical accepts at least a modicum of discipline, law, or commitment in order better to adhere to the generic common. 
A promiscuous ontology assumes a kind of ontological anarchy rooted in contin-gency and the seeming absence of law, while a prophylactic ontology posits axiomatically some sort of "foundation," law, or way. Promiscuous ontologies may seem attractive at first glance, because they are adept at corroding and collapsing even 
the most odious of normative hierarchies (patriarchy, orientalism, heteronorma-tivity). Yet promiscuous ontologies have a danger of falling into a tyranny of structurelessness, in which "all that is solid melts into air" and things are caught up in the  larger  movements  of  an invisible  engine  of  power.  To  be  sure,  prophylactic 
ontologies, if improperly wrought, also have their own dangers; they can easily slip into priggish moral philosophy, ontological essentialism, or even a kind of quasi- 
fascism. The key is to craft the non- foundation in such a way that it avoids these dangers.  Deleuze's  solution is  to  make  the  foundation immanent,  multiple,  and 
in!nite.  Badiou  does  something  similar:  transcendental,  multiple,  and  in!nite. Laruelle's solution is slightly di)erent: the non- foundation of the one is immanent 
and generic, but also !nite.
/ .   EJ ? C D K
  1. Martin Heidegger, "The End of Philosophy and the Task of Thinking," in On Time and Being, $+.

  2. Heidegger, "The Principle of Identity," in Identity and Di#erence, -$.  3. See, in particular, Georges Bataille, "Formless," in Vision of Excess: Selected 
Writings,  $B5D- $B%B,  trans.  Allan  Stoekl  (Minneapolis:  University  of  Minnesota Press,  "#%0),  .",  and  Yve- Alain  Bois  and  Rosalind  E.  Krauss,  Formless:  A  User's 
Guide (New York: Zone Books, -,,,).  4. See, for example, Laruelle, Principes de la non- philosophie, -"..
  5. For his part, Badiou does not shy away from the image of the hero, as he admits at the end of Logics of Worlds: "I am sometimes told that I see in philosophy 
only a means to reestablish, against the contemporary apologia of the futile and the everyday, the rights of heroism. Why not? Having said that, ancient heroism 
claimed to justify life through sacri!ce. My wish is to make heroism exist through the a*rmative joy which is universally generated by following consequences through. 
We could say that the epic heroism of the one who gives his life is supplanted by 

    241 26/08/2014   5:06:23 PM

!4!  Notes to Chapter I
the  mathematical  heroism  of  the  one  who  creates  life,  point  by  point"  (Alain Badiou,  Logics  of  Worlds:  Being  and  Event,  5,  trans.  Alberto  Toscano  [London: 
Continuum, -,,#], 0"/).  6. Indeed Laruelle is rather dismissive of the Deleuzian event: "Deleuze gives 
a  standard,  philosophically  average  description  of  the  event  because  he  brings together  all  its  transcendental  conditions  in  perfect  equilibrium."  See  Franc,ois 
Laruelle, "Identity and Event," trans. Ray Brassier, Pli # (-,,,): "+/- %#, "+$.  7. Ibid.
  8. Even Laruelle must expend much energy to demonstrate the extreme imma-nence of the one. For if the one is immanent to itself, why even suggest that it must 
"remain within" itself? Why instill even a modicum of doubt that there might exist a beyond to the one? To say that the one is immanent is, on the merits, not exactly 
true, because immanence speaks in the language of transcendence ("remaining") even as it negates transcendence in favor of inherent pervasiveness ("within"). And 
the one is absolutely incompatible with the transcendental-- not that the transcen-dental is the negation of the one, but simply that the one is so pervasive and supersaturated in its identity that it absolutely preempts any transcendental whatsoever, except those cloned directly from its identity.
  9.  Deleuze, Di#erence and Repetition, .,/, emphasis added.  10. Laruelle states his entire theory of the event succinctly as follows: "We distinguish  between  three  modes  of  the  event:  ".  the  intra- philosophical  event  or event- object of philosophies;  -. the world- Event with its philosophical form, or 
`philosophy' insofar as it constitutes the prototypical or originary event; .. a rigor-ous theory (that of the world- Event) as non- philosophical Advent [Ave`nement]; one 
which  is  still  primary  but  dependent  on  a  cause  of  the  last- instance"  (Laruelle, "Identity and Event," "%/). The first is thus the normal day- to- day level of events as 

relations and decisions. The second is philosophy itself, as a decision (the philo-sophical  decision),  and  hence  as  an  event  superimposed  into  and  coterminous 
with  the  world.  The  third  mode,  however,  is  the  non- philosophical  mode  that withdraws from the evental decision in order to theorize the event itself as unilateral identity. "The Advent is no longer in excess of the World as given, because such an excess now belongs to the World. . . . The Advent comes neither from afar 
nor from on high. It emerges as a radical solitude that it is impossible to manipu-late, to dominate, to reduce, like the solitude of great works of art. . . . It no longer 
announces anything, it is neither absence nor presence nor even an `other pres-ence', but rather unique solitude given- in- One in- the- last- instance. . . . The Advent 
is not more absolute than the philosophy- Event, which is already absolute, but it is radical. It is not more `originary' in some vague manner, it is archi- originary or 
radically first" (ibid., "%$, "%+).  11. Deleuze, The Logic of Sense, "/%.
  12. Heidegger, "The Principle of Identity," .+, emphasis added.  13. Jean Baudrillard, Passwords, trans. Chris Turner (London: Verso, -,,.), $". 
Much more could be done on the relationship between Baudrillard and Laruelle, 

    242 26/08/2014   5:06:23 PM

  Notes to Chapter J  !43
particularly around the question of Baudrillard's concepts of fatal strategy, hyper- reversibility, and structural indi)erence. In a certain sense, Baudrillard invented  
a  kind  of  proto- non- standard  method  strictly  within  the  available  discourse  of  post- structuralism.

0 .   C E O P G D ? ? K
  1. Franc,ois  Laruelle,  "Lettre  a`  Deleuze,"  La  De'cision  philosophique  0  (April "#%%): ","- $.

  2. Franc,ois Dosse, Gilles Deleuze and Fe'lix Guattari: Intersecting Lives, trans. Deborah Glassman (New York: Columbia University Press, -,",).
  3. Gilles Deleuze, "Le `Je me souviens' de Gilles Deleuze," Le Nouvel Observa-teur  (November "$- --, "##0):  0". As  Deleuzians  are  keen to  point out,  the aged 
Deleuze spoke of an upcoming book project devoted to "the grandeur of Marx," a book that unfortunately was never realized during his lifetime.
  4. Jean- Louis Baudry et al., "La re'volution ici maintenant: Sept points," Tel Quel ./ (October "#$%): .- /.
  5. See, for example, the account given in Bernard Dionysius Geoghegan, "From Information  Theory  to  French  Theory:  Jakobson,  Le'vi- Strauss,  and  the  Cybernetic Apparatus," Critical Inquiry .% (Autumn -,""): #$- "-$.  6. Parenthetical citations refer to Gilles Deleuze, "Postscript on Control Societies,"  in  Negotiations,  $BD5- $BB@,  trans.  Martin  Joughin  (New  York:  Columbia University Press, "##0). Those seeking the French should consult Gilles Deleuze, 
Pourparlers, $BD5- $BB@ (Paris: Les E'ditions de Minuit, "##,). Note that the original French essay first appeared a couple months prior in L'Autre Journal (May "##,) 
and bore a slightly shorter title, "Les socie'te's de contro^le." The essay was thus never intended as a "postscript" to anything in particular, and only gained the appellation as a result of being bundled at the tail end of Pourparlers.  7. Deleuze,  Guattari,  and  Foucault  participated  in  the  famous  "Schizo  Culture" conference held at Columbia University in "#+0. Burroughs gave a talk at the conference titled "The Impasses of Control."
  8. Laruelle  heaps  scorn  on  this  kind  of  techno- science,  or  what  he  terms "world- research," an umbrella for all manner of think tanks, skunk works, innovation  labs,  R&D  departments,  research  parks,  government  labs, nonpro!t  policy institutes, and university science initiatives. "Regarding the population of researchers, World- Research is a way of controlling them as `subjects' adjunct to research initiatives and subjected to a specifically liberal and capitalist dominion over science" (Laruelle, Introduction aux sciences ge'ne'riques, .").  9. Today the expression "Web sur!ng" is common; however, because he was 
writing just prior to the advent of the Web, Deleuze's frame of reference would have included television and the phenomenon of channel sur!ng, as well as the 
actual sport of wave sur!ng. In an earlier piece titled "Mediators," also included in Negotiations, Deleuze says a bit more about sur!ng. "The kind of movements you 
!nd in sports and habits are changing. We got by for a long time with an energetic 

    243 26/08/2014   5:06:23 PM

!44  Notes to Chapter J
conception of motion, where  there's a point of  contact, or  we are  the  source of movement. Running, putting the shot, and so on: e)ort, resistance, with a starting 
point, a lever. But nowadays we see movement de!ned less and less in relation to a point of  leverage.  All the  new  sports-- sur!ng, windsur!ng, hang- gliding-- take 
the form of entering into an existing wave. There's no longer an origin as starting point, but a sort of putting- into- orbit. The key thing is how to get taken up in the 
motion of a big wave, a column of rising air, to `get into something' instead of being the origin of an e)ort" (Deleuze, Negotiations, "-"). The sur!ng image also appears 
in  What  Is  Philosophy?  During  their  itemization  of  the  features  of  conceptual personae, Deleuze and Guattari describe the dynamic features as follows: "If moving  forward,  climbing,  and  descending  are  dynamisms  of  conceptual  personae, then  leaping  like  Kierkegaard,  dancing  like  Nietzsche,  and  diving  like  Melville  
are others for philosophical athletes irreducible to one another. And if today our sports are completely changing, if the old energy- producing activities are giving 
way to exercises that, on the contrary, insert themselves on existing energetic net-works, this is not just a change in the type but yet other dynamic features that enter 
a thought that `slides' with new substances of being, with wave or snow, and turn the thinker into a sort of surfer as conceptual persona" (Gilles Deleuze and Fe'lix 
Guattari, What Is Philosophy? trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Graham Burchell [New York: Columbia University Press, "##/], +").
  10. In Anti- Badiou: Sur l'introduction du maoi"sme dans la philosophie and other recent work, Laruelle has turned to quantum mechanics, particularly the principles of  superposition and non- commutativity.  English translator Robin Mackay has rendered Laruelle's quantiel as "quantware," mimicking the relationship between 
logiciel and software. See Franc,ois Laruelle, Anti- Badiou: On the Introduction of Maoism into Philosophy, trans. Robin Mackay (London: Continuum, -,"-).

  11. Gilles Deleuze, Francis Bacon: Logique de la sensation (Paris: E'ditions de la Di)e'rence,  "#%").  The  French  edition  was  expanded  and  reissued  in  "#%/,  then 
reprinted in Alain Badiou and Barbara Cassin's book series at E'ditions du Seuil in -,,-. The original French edition is in two volumes: volume " contains Deleuze's 
text, while volume - contains several reproductions from Bacon's paintings. The current  French  edition  consolidates  the  volumes  and  contains  only  seven color 
plates. The English edition, which unfortunately features no imagery at all, was published in -,,/ as Gilles Deleuze, Francis Bacon: The Logic of Sensation, trans. 
Daniel Smith (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, -,,/).  12. Published in the same year as Deleuze's Francis Bacon, Laruelle's Le prin- 
cipe de minorite' also has something to say about digitality. Laruelle mentions three di)erent kinds of multiplicities, (") "discrete or arithmetic" multiplicities, (-) continuous multiplicities, which he associates with Di)erence, and (.) what he calls "dispersive multiplicities," which he also labels "Unary Multiplicities or Minorities," claiming that they are "the absolute concept or the essence of multiplicities" (p.  $). The  first two  are clearly code  words for  digital  and analog:  the  realm  of 
discrete arithmetic is the realm of the digital, while the realm of the continuous is the realm of the analog. What is so provocative, then, is the third term-- that there 

    244 26/08/2014   5:06:23 PM

  Notes to Chapter J  !45
should be a third term. The provocation will eventually lead Laruelle away from digitality, precisely because it will lead him away from philosophy.
  13. Deleuze, Francis Bacon, #0.  14. Deleuze, Di#erence and Repetition, -"".
  15. Deleuze, Francis Bacon, #..  16. Ibid., #0.
  17. Ibid.  18. A few other relevant references exist such as Deleuze and Guattari's mention of "three ages" in their introduction to What Is Philosophy?: "The three ages of the concept are the encyclopedia, pedagogy, and commercial professional training" ("-). See also Fe'lix Guattari, "Mode`le de contrainte ou mode'lisation cre'ative," Terminal 0. (April- May "##"): /..
  19. Deleuze, Negotiations, "+/, "+0.  20. Gilles Deleuze, "Having an Idea in Cinema," in Deleuze and Guattari: New 
Mappings in Politics, Philosophy and Culture, ed. Eleanor Kaufman and Kevin Jon Heller (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, "##%), "%, translation modi!ed. This text also appears in a di)erent form under the title "What Is the Creative Act?" in Gilles Deleuze, Two Regimes of Madness: Texts and Interviews $BD6- $BB6, 
trans. Ames Hodges and Mike Taormina (New York: Semiotext(e), -,,$), ."-- -/.  21. Gilles  Deleuze  "Qu'est- ce  que  l'acte  de  cre'ation?"  http://www.webdeleuze 
.com/php/texte.php?cle="./&groupe=Conf=E#rences&langue=").  The  reference to Minitel does not appear in the version of the essay collected in Gilles Deleuze, 
Deux re'gimes de fous: Textes et entretiens $BD6- $BB6 (Paris: Les E'ditions de Minuit, -,,.), and hence neither in the English translation contained in Two Regimes of 

Madness.  22. As  Fre'de'ric  Astier  notes  in  his  doctoral  thesis,  Deleuze  mentioned  the 
superfold in his seminars on Foucault held on March "% and -0, "#%$. See Fre'de'ric Astier, "La philosophie orale de Gilles Deleuze et son ro^le dans l'e'laboration de son 
oeuvre  e'crite"  (PhD  thesis,  Universite'  Paris  %,  Vincennes- Saint- Denis,  France, December ., -,,+), -#,- #". I thank Adeline Gasnier for bringing this to my attention. Toward the ending of the March -0 session Deleuze reiterates some of the ideas that would reappear in book form, specifying that the superfold is the fold 
sur le dehors (over the outside; a fold that incorporates the outside), an allusion to Foucault's concept of the "thought of the outside." See Gilles Deleuze, Cours du 56 
mars $BEC. Sur Foucault. Le pouvoir: anne'e universitaire $BE6- $BEC. B., track /; /" min., ". sec.; audio recording; from Bibliothe`que nationale de France, http://gallica 
.bnf.fr/ark:/"-"/%/bpt$k"-%.%%k. Deleuze's March "%, "#%$, seminar is even more explicit: the historical shift from God to man to superman corresponds directly to 
the processes of unfolding (God), folding (man), and superfolding (superman). See Gilles Deleuze, Cours du $E mars $BEC. Sur Foucault. Le pouvoir: anne'e universitaire $BE6- $BEC. E., track "; "" min., "0 sec.; audio recording; from Bibliothe`que nationale de France, http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/"-"/%/bpt$k"-%.%+$.
  23. Gilles Deleuze, Foucault, trans. Sea'n Hand (Minneapolis: University of Min-ne sota Press, "#%%), #-, #..

    245 26/08/2014   5:06:23 PM

!46  Notes to Chapter J
  24. Ibid., ".,.  25. Ibid., "."- .-. Just as Nietzsche's U"bermensch is rendered alternately in English as "overman" or "superman," one might translate Deleuze's surpli as "overfold" as well as "superfold."
  26. Gilles Deleuze, The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque, trans. Tom Conley (Min-neapolis: University of Minnesota Press, "##.), $.
  27. Laruelle  has  integrated  fractals  and  what  he  calls  "generalized  fractality" into his work to great e)ect. See in particular his The'orie des identite's: Fractalite' 
ge'ne'ralise'e et philosophie arti!cielle (Paris: PUF, "##-), and The Concept of Non- photography.
  28. Such is the argument contained in Laruelle, "L'ordinateur transcen dantal," 0- "#.
  29. Ibid., "..
$ .   C A P H DA M H K O
  1. Louis Althusser, Lenin and Philosophy: And Other Essays, trans. Ben Brew-ster (New York: Monthly Review Press, -,,"), 0+.

  2. Ibid., 0-.  3. Fredric  Jameson,  Representing  Capital:  A  Reading  of  Volume  One  (New 
York: Verso, -,""), /+, -..  4. Ibid., --.
  5. At a revealing moment, Laruelle stresses that his kernel is "real" or "symp-tomatic" but never "rational," framing everything against an Althusserian backdrop. "Althusser's `error,'" he writes, "is to have searched in Marx for the rational (and thus philosophical and idealist) kernel of the Hegelian dialectic; whereas, in 
all philosophers, one must  first identify the real symptomatic kernel" (Laruelle, Introduction au non- marxisme, /$).

In the following passage Laruelle also evokes Marx's famous kernel metaphor, and as he often does Laruelle uses the analogy of non- Euclidean geometry to outline  the  position  of  non- philosophy  vis- a`- vis  philosophy,  or  in  this  case  non- Marxism  vis- a`- vis  Marxism:  "Such  a  project,  in  the  spirit  of  a  `non- Euclidean' 
marxism, consists in producing, on the bases of this certain ingredient = X [i.e.  the non- philosophical ingredient in marxism], the universal non- marxist kernel 
not  of  marxism  but  for  it  and  starting  from  it  simultaneously  as  symptom  and model,  in  general  as  `material'"  (ibid.,  $).  In  this  way  Laruelle's  book  on  Marx 
!nally (eshes out the larger claim, commonly heard in non- philosophy, that phi-losophy must stand as "material" for non- philosophy. With this book it is clearer 
what exactly Laruelle means by "material"; he means the material infrastructure, and further he means materialism as a bridge joining philosophy with scientific 
non- philosophy.  6. In  a  surprising  turn  of  phrase,  Althusser  expresses  a  Laruellean  impulse 
avant la lettre when in a "#+$ lecture he writes that "to support our argument by comparison with the revolutionary State, which ought to be a State that is a `non- 
State'-- that is, a State tending to its own dissolution, to be replaced by forms of free 

    246 26/08/2014   5:06:23 PM

  Notes to Chapter K  !47
association-- one  might  equally  say  that  the  philosophy  which  obsessed  Marx, Lenin and Gramsci ought to be a `non- philosophy'-- that is, one which ceases to be 
produced in the form of a philosophy, whose function of theoretical hegemony will  disappear  in  order  to  make  way  for  new  forms  of  philosophical  existence" 
(Louis Althusser, "The Transformation of  Philosophy," trans. Thomas  Lewis, in Philosophy and the Spontaneous Philosophy of the Scientists, and Other Essays [London: Verso "##,], -$/). But even earlier, in February "#$%, he had already called for a "non- philosophy" during his explanation of the syntax of the title "Lenin and 
Philosophy": "Not Lenin's philosophy, but Lenin on philosophy. In fact, I believe that what we own to Lenin, something which is perhaps not completely unprecedented, but certainly invaluable, is the beginnings of the ability to talk a kind of discourse  which  anticipates  what  will  one  day  perhaps  be  a  non- philosophical 
theory of philosophy" (Althusser, Lenin and Philosophy, "/). Or a few lines earlier when Althusser anticipates Laruelle's emblematic preference for the preposition in 
instead of the preposition of, indeed not just a preference but an absolute mandate: Althusser tells the audience assembled at the Socie'te' Franc,aise de Philosophie that 
his talk "will be a talk in philosophy. But this talk in philosophy will not quite be a talk of philosophy. It will be, or rather will try to be, a talk on philosophy" (ibid., 
".). Had he been present, Laruelle would most certainly have agreed with such an elevation of in over of.
  7. Although the political import of Laruelle's work is distributed in a complex fashion across his entire body of work, two books, Le principe de minorite' and Une 
biographie de l'homme ordinaire: Des Autorite's et des Minor ite' (Paris: Aubier, "#%0), are notable for their description of dispersive or "minoritarian" multiplicities and 
the minority individuation or minoritarian thought of the "ordinary man" as he exists in a determinative relation to states, authorities, and worlds.

In the non- Marxism book, Laruelle speaks of these categories of subjecthood in terms of a "subject- in- struggle." This subject would be a "non- proletarian" or "universal stranger" summoned not from the call for "workers of the world to unite!" but rather from a call to remain "uni!ed" in immanent identity. See Laruelle, Introduction au non- marxisme, ""%, as well as all of chapter $ (",#- .#).An  additional,  shorter  text  is  relevant  here  too,  Laruelle's  "pre'cis"  of  non- 
Marxism, "Pour un marxisme clandestin" (manuscript, undated), which reiterates and ampli!es the issues first broached in the -,,, book.
  8. Innumerable are the ways in which philosophers have tried to normalize materialism in order to make it more palatable, writes Laruelle. He lists several of 
the guilty parties: normalization "by existentialism (Sartre), by structure (Althusser), by the transcendental phenomenology of auto- a)ecting life (Henry), by the transindividual as a synthesis of the collective and the individual (Balibar), by decon-struction of its `specters' (Derrida), by contractuality and metastructure (Bidet)" 
(Laruelle, Introduction au non- marxisme, ..).  9. Ibid., 0, emphasis removed.
  10. Laruelle is admittedly somewhat vulnerable to the same critique that Rancie`re makes of Althusser in Althusser's Lesson. In that book Rancie`re indicts Althusser 

    247 26/08/2014   5:06:23 PM

!48  Notes to Chapter K
on the grounds of intellectual elitism, that Althusser, by making Marx more sci-enti!c, was only making Marxism "safe" for university professors and other elite 
technicians. See Jacques Rancie`re, La lec,on d'Althusser (Paris: Gallimard, "#+/), .0.  11. For an extensive discussion of science and philosophy see chapter - in Laruelle, Principes de la non- philosophie. In the non- Marxism book, Laruelle attacks Althusser directly, devoting a number of pages to how the Althusserian concepts 
of  "problematic"  and  "epistemological  break"  should  be  superseded  by  "uni!ed theory." See Laruelle, Introduction au non- marxisme, +%- %..
  12. Laruelle, Introduction au non- marxisme, --.  13. To help explain this sense of "universal capitalism," Laruelle writes that "the 
real universal object of non- marxism will be capitalism plus the entire set of its philosophical  conditions structured in their `essence,' which is to say `universal' 
capitalism  in  the  radical  sense  of  the  term,  the  synthesis  of  capitalism  and  the essence of philosophy under the auspices, the one and the other, of `World'" (ibid., 
%). In other words, one cannot simply examine capitalism itself, one must look at the "World" produced from the grand collaboration between capitalism and philosophy. Laruelle admits, then, that the subject of his non- Marxism book is, in the most general sense, "philosophically universal capitalism" (ibid., #).
  14. Ibid., "/0.  15. Ibid., ",.
  16. Ibid., /-.  17. Karl Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (New York: International Publishers, "#$.), /+.  18. Karl Marx, Early Writings, trans. Rodney Livingstone and Gregor Benton 
(London: Penguin, "#+/), /-0.  19. Ibid.
  20. Laruelle discusses force de travail and force (de) pense'e together in Introduc-tion au non- marxisme, """- "0.
  21. Ibid., .#.  22. Ibid., -+.
  23. Ibid., /,.  24. The DLI logic in Laruelle is indeed unique. Heidegger's being- unto- death is 
perhaps another instance of this unusual logic, to the extent that being- unto- death requires the construction of a relation with an event, one's death, from which it  
is impossible to achieve a reciprocated relation in return. See, in particular, the second  half  of  Heidegger,  Being  and  Time.  Heidegger  writes  that  death  is  non- 
relational and yet nevertheless still "mine": "Death is the possibility of the absolute impossibility of Dasein" (-#/).
  25. See, in particular, Badiou's discussion of the communist hypothesis in Alain Badiou, The  Meaning of  Sarkozy,  trans.  David Fernbach  (London: Verso,  -,,%) 
and  Alain  Badiou,  The  Communist  Hypothesis,  trans.  David  Macey  and  Steve Corcoran (London: Verso, -,",). According to Badiou the communist hypothesis 
existed already, under modernity at least, during two historical periods, "+#-- "%+" from the French Revolution to the Paris Commune, and "#"+- +$ from the Russian 

    248 26/08/2014   5:06:23 PM

  Notes to Chapter L  !49
Revolution to the end of  the  Cultural Revolution in China. Based on this peri-odization, Badiou forecasts the appearance of a third historical phase for the communist hypothesis.Marx's "mole," originally from a passage in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis 
Napoleon-- "The revolution is thoroughgoing. . . . It does its work methodically. . . . When it has done this second half of its preliminary work, Europe will leap from 

its seat and exultantly exclaim: Well grubbed, old mole!" (Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon, "-"; Marx was paraphrasing from Hamlet: "Well said, 
old mole! canst work i' the earth so fast?" [Act ", Scene V])-- has been revived most recently in Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, Empire (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, -,,,), 0+- 0%. In contrast to the old mole of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, Hardt and Negri propose a new metaphor of the snake, 
suggesting that today's political events, with their "in!nite undulations" (0+), can strike like a snake at any time and from any place against the very core of Empire.
  26. Laruelle, Introduction au non- marxisme, "+.  27. Ibid., +.
  28. Althusser, Lenin and Philosophy, .$. The Hegelian undertones here-- a sci-ence of logic as pure thought-- are ironic given Althusser's antipathy for Hegel.
  29. Karl Korsch, Three Essays on Marxism (New York: Monthly Review Press, "#+-), $0, emphasis removed.
  30. Laruelle, Introduction au non- marxisme, .%.  31. Ibid., .+.
  32. Gilles Deleuze, Kant's Critical Philosophy, trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Bar-bara Habberjam (London: Athlone Press, "#%/), "".
  33. Kant, Prolegomena, ", -/, -0, -$, .", and passim.
+.   TI ?   B M A B Q   UC H J ? ? K ?
  1. See,  in  particular,  the  second  chapter  of  Laruelle,  Principes  de  la  non- philosophie, titled "First Science as Uni!ed Theory of Science and Philosophy, or 

Democracy within Thought" (/.- #.).  2. Laruelle, "Du noir univers," ",+- "-, """. Since its inaugural issue, Laruelle's 
journal La De'cision philosophique was organized in two sections, a more or less straightforward opening section, followed by a shorter, more informal ending section dubbed "Experimentation; Fiction; Hyper- speculation." If the main articles in the journal resembled traditional attempts to grapple with philosophy from a non- 
standard point of view, the ending section touted actual examples of what it would mean to write non- philosophically. "Du noir univers" ("On the Black Universe") 
appeared in the hyper- speculative, experimental section of the journal, bundled in the pages immediately following Laruelle's notorious !ve- page "Letter to Deleuze."
  3. Ibid., ""-.  4. Ibid., """.
  5. Deleuze, Cinema 5, -,,.  6. Franc,ois Laruelle, "Biographie de l'oeil," La De'cision philosophique # ("#%#): 
#.- ",/, #$.

    249 26/08/2014   5:06:23 PM

!5;  Notes to Chapter L
  7. Ibid.  8. Using internal quotations from Kandinsky, Michel Henry writes that "black 
is a nothingness bereft of possibilities. It is a future `without hope' and a death `as if the sun had become extinct'. It comes `full circle', a `spent funeral- pyre, something motionless, like a corpse, which is dead to all sensations'" (Michel Henry, Seeing the Invisible: On Kandinsky, trans. Scott Davidson [London: Continuum, 
-,,#], +%- +#).  9. Ibid., #+.
  10. Ibid., ##.  11. Heidegger, Being and Time, "+".
  12. In an essay devoted to media theory, written concurrently with this book, I describe such modes of mediation at greater length: the two, the one, and the multiple are three discrete "middles" condensed into the three Greek divinities Hermes, Iris,  and  the  Eumenides.  See  "Love  of  the  Middle"  in  Alexander  R.  Galloway, 
Eugene Thacker, and McKenzie Wark, Excommunication: Three Inquiries in Media and Mediation, -0- +$ (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, -,".).
  13. Reza Negarestani, Cyclonopedia: Complicity with Anonymous Materials (Mel-bourne: re.press, -,,%), -$.
  14. Athanasius Kircher was known to have a catoptric chest "completely !lled with  a  treasure  of  all  sorts  of  delicacies,  fruits,  and  precious  ornaments,"  as 
described by his student Kaspar Schott: "You will exhibit the most delightful trick if you [introduce into the chest] a live cat, as Fr. Kircher has done. While the cat 
sees himself to be surrounded by an innumerable multitude of catoptric cats, some of them standing close to him and others spread very far away from him, it can 
hardly be said how many jokes will be exhibited in that theatre, while he some-times tries to follow the other cats, sometimes to entice them with his tail, sometimes attempts a kiss, and indeed tries to break through the obstacles in every way with his claws so that he can be united with the other cats, until !nally, with various noises, and miserable whines he declares his various a)ections of indignation, rage, jealousy, love and desire." See Georgio de Sepibus, Romani Collegii Musaeum 
Celeberrimum . . . and Kaspar Schott, Magia Universalis, quoted in Michael John Gorman and Nick Wilding, "Techica Curiosa: The Mechanical Marvels of Kaspar 
Schott ("$,%- "$$$)," in Kaspar Schott, La "Technica Curiosa" (Florence: Edizioni dell'Elefante, -,,,), -$,, -+/.
  15. Franciscus Aguilonius, Opticorum Libri Sex, philosophis juxta ac mathema-ticis utiles (Antwerp: Plantin Press, "$".), bk. ", pp. .", ...
  16. Quoted in Martin Jay, Downcast Eyes: The Denigration of Vision in Twentieth- Century French Thought (Berkeley: University of California Press, "##/), +..

  17. Eugene  Thacker,  "Three  Questions  on  Demonology,"  in  Hideous  Gnosis: Black Metal  Theory  Symposium  $, ed.  Nicola Masciandaro,  "+#- -"#, (New  York: 
Glossator, -,",), "%$.  18. Negarestani, Cyclonopedia, -%.
  19. Laruelle, "Du noir univers," """.

    250 26/08/2014   5:06:24 PM

  Notes to Chapter M  !5:
  20. Far from rejecting the color spectrum outright, Laruelle embraces it, recast-ing color as the "material" for non- philosophical thinking. Every philosophy contains a special hue, Laruelle suggests, a special color of thought that di)erentiates it  from  others  around  it.  "Another  non- philosophical  e)ect  has  to  do  with  the 
color of thought," he notes. "We obtain such color via the superposition of philo-sophical styles. . . . The signature claims of a given philosophy have a certain wavelength with a determined propagation frequency or period, and this distinguishes them from the same claims made by other authors while still allowing one to be 
superpositioned  on  top  of  another.  This  is  how  we  acquire  a  certain  color  of thought from out of the pile of individual concepts-- but not merely a new thought 
system or rigid doctrine, never just a Marxist color, a zen color, or a phenomenol-ogy color. Thought is a prism first, a spectrum of radiation. Only `later' is it a system" (Laruelle, Philosophie non- standard, /+%).  21. Laruelle, The Concept of Non- photography, ++.
  22. Ibid., ./.  23. Laruelle, "Biographie de l'oeil," #%.
  24. Ibid.  25. Laruelle, The Concept of Non- photography, #0, "-.

  26. Ibid., /+.  27. Laruelle, "Du noir univers," ""-.
  28. Laruelle, "Biographie de l'oeil," #$.  29. Ibid., ##.
  30. Ibid.  31. Ibid.
  32. Ibid., ",-.
% .   A ? D   A C F   U D E P H A
  1. Franc,ois Laruelle, "A Light Odyssey: La de'couverte de la lumie`re comme proble`me the'orique et esthe'tique" (undated typescript), ". The text was written for 

an exhibition of James Turrell's work at le Confort Moderne in Poitiers, France, in the early "##,s. Although more specific details are elusive, it was likely published 
in "##" on the occasion of James Turrell's exhibition "Heavy Water" at at le Confort Moderne.

A number of secondary sources are available on Turrell and his work, including Craig Adcock, James Turrell: The Art of Light and Space (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, "##,), and Georges Didi- Huberman, L'Homme qui marchait dans la  couleur  (Paris:  Minuit,  -,,").  While  acknowledging  his  use  of  light,  Didi- 
Huberman characterizes Turrell primarily as an artist of space and movement.  2. "First Light: Twenty Etchings by James Turrell" (press release), Museum of 
Modern Art, New York (July "##,).  3. Quoted in Amanda Boetzkes, The Ethics of Earth Art (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, -,",), ""#, emphasis added.  4. Laruelle, "A Light Odyssey," ".
  5. Ibid.

    251 26/08/2014   5:06:24 PM

!5!  Notes to Chapter M
  6. Ibid., $.  7. Ibid.,  %. On the topic of  phenomenological revealing, Laruelle also  notes 
that "when a subject is in a `Turrellean' mode, its a)ect does not allow for a light that would be hidden and/or unveiled" (ibid., #). The key issue for Laruelle is that 
philosophy prohibits any kind of direct thought in light. Rather philosophy tends toward  reflections on light. "Light is the medium most favored by philosophy, and 
so philosophy-- by way of ontology and phenomenology-- must be understood as love of light more than light itself, just as philosophy is love of wisdom more than 
wisdom itself " (ibid., 0).  8. Ibid., ",.
  9. Ibid., "/.  10. Ibid.,  -,. To  be clear, Laruelle uses the term  identity to mean something 
very particular, the immanent common. As has been stressed throughout, his use of the term should not be confused with the way identity is used in discourses on 
identity politics or postmodern subject formation, particularly because these dis-courses typically use identity as a way to examine di)erence, not the common.
  11. Ibid., 0.  12. Laruelle,  The  Concept  of  Non- photography,  and  Franc,ois  Laruelle,  Photo- 
Fiction,  a  Non- standard  Aesthetics  /  Photo- !ction,  une  esthe'tique  non- standard, trans. Drew Burk (Minneapolis: Univocal, -,"-).
  13. Laruelle, Photo- Fiction, /, translation modi!ed.  14. Ibid.
  15. Laruelle, The Concept of Non- photography, "".  16. Laruelle, Photo- Fiction, .+. See also the first chapter in section - of Laruelle, 
Philosophie non- standard, devoted to the (ash and the principle of sufficient light (#0- ",0).

  17. Laruelle,  Photo- Fiction,  $,  translation  modi!ed.  For  idiosyncratic  if  not pedantic reasons my preference is to reverse the word order of some of Laruelle's 
hyphenated terms and render photo- !ction as "!ction- photography" or "!ction- photo." In greater deference to the original French, translator Drew Burk has opted 
to follow Laruelle's word order. For more on Laruelle's use of the term !ction, see chapter "$ of Laruelle, Philosophie non- standard, /+#- 0,/.
  18. Laruelle,  Photo- Fiction,  00,  translation  modi!ed.  Given  that  photography indexes and orients itself re(exively in relation to a world, Laruelle is intent on 
labeling all of photography, and indeed philosophy, as characteristically modern, modernist even. "Photography is the Modernist art par excellence," he remarks. 
But !ction- photography  is di)erent; "!ction- photography [photo- !ction] is pre-cisely the passage from an exemplarily modern aesthetics to a contemporary and 
inventive aesthetics that conjugates the arts and unfolds them" (ibid., .%- .#, trans-lation  modi!ed).  Thus  by  way  of  generic  extension  or  generalization,  !ction- 
photography avoids modernism's penchant for both meta-  reflection and narcis-sistic autonomy-- that old chestnut "art for art's sake." In this way, Laruelle might 
be characterized not so much as modern or antimodern but alter- modern, because he asserts a nonre(exive autonomous real that is not contrary to the modern but 
exists alongside it.

    252 26/08/2014   5:06:24 PM

  Notes to Chapter M  !53

Like  Laruelle,  Henry  is  also  essentially  an anti-   or  alter- modern thinker.  He exhibits a certain super!cial distrust of modern technology, of course, as is the 
case of those he writes about (Husserl, Heidegger, Schopenhauer, Kandinsky). But Henry's alter- modernity is more fundamental than that. Consider those emblematic modern assertions: the medium is the message; the form determines the con-tent;  the  conditions  of  possibility  of  thinking  determine  what  can  be  said  and 
thought. These kinds of claims are the emblematic form of modernity, whether  the early modern thought of Galileo or Descartes, or a more contemporary Kant, 
Foucault, or McLuhan. Yet as an alter- modern, Henry argues precisely the reverse: content determines form; Inner Necessity determines composition; spirit determines matter; will or a)ect determines representation.  19. Laruelle, The Concept of Non- photography, %.

  20. Ibid., #/.  21. Ibid., "-.
  22. Franc,ois Laruelle, Struggle and Utopia at the End Times of Philosophy, "-.  23. See, for example, Laruelle, Struggle and Utopia at the End Times of Philosophy, where he is explicit about the connection between non- philosophy and the utopia narratives common in science  !ction: "In passing from the world to the 
Universe  without  horizon,  and  from  a  terrestrial  technics  to  utopian  technol- ogy, the future of humanity comes to be of the utmost importance for science !ction, which tears it away from its traditional foundational tasks in the World and consecrates it to utopia" (/). However, Laruelle considers standard utopias to be 
oriented toward the past, whatever chronology they might propose, while non- standard utopia is properly future oriented because of its axiomatic and oracular 
logic.  24. August von Briesen was born August "$, "#.0, in Budapest, Hungry, to a 
German father and a Hungarian mother. His life was marked by a series of upheav-als, and he eventually emigrated out of Hungary to England in the wake of the 
Soviet invasion of Hungary in "#0$. He lived in a few di)erent countries before settling  in  France in  "#+-.  The  biographic  record is  uncertain,  and von Briesen 
himself was secretive about his own name and origins; however, it is possible his birth name was Jo'zsef Kova'cs or Jo'zsef Kova'cs- Go"mo"ri. His death at the age of 
sixty- eight is shrouded in pathos; he died alone in poverty in Paris, where he suc-cumbed to the heat wave of -,,.. "At the end of his life," the newspapers recounted 
at the time, "the Hungarian emigre was living o) of the meal vouchers provided by the local social services o*ce of the "$th arrondissement. He died at the age of $% 
in his small attic apartment on the Avenue  Foch" ("Le destin tragique d'August  von Briesen" [obituary], Le Parisien [September "", -,,.], http://www.leparisien.fr 
/societe/le- destin- tragique- d- august- von- briesen- ""- ,#- -,,.- -,,/.%,%,0.php.) The summer heat wave claimed a number of lives that year, particularly among the 
elderly. It was feared that he would be buried in potter's !eld, because his body went unclaimed for some time before eventually being identi!ed. After his death  
a certain Mr. Yves Pozzo di Borgo put forth a petition that the city acquire a work by von Briesen for the Muse'e National d'Art Moderne at the Centre Pompidou. 

    253 26/08/2014   5:06:24 PM

!54  Notes to Chapter M
However, according to the transcript of a -,,/ city council debate, various attempts to track down von Briesen's heirs were unsuccessful, and they were unable to make 
the acquisition.  25. See  Michel  Henry,  "Graphie  de  la  subjectivite',"  in  Franc,ois  Laruelle,  ed., 
Re'9exions  philosophiques  sur  l'oeuvre  d'August  von  Briesen  (Paris:  Fondation Brandenburg- Neumark, "#%/): -0- $,, which was reprinted with minor changes as 
Michel Henry, "Dessiner la musique: The'orie pour l'art de Briesen," Le Nouveau Commerce $" (Spring "#%0): /#- ",$, and again reprinted in Michel Henry, Phe'nome'nologie de la vie, Tome III: De l'art et du politique (Paris: PUF, -,,/): -/"- %-; Henry, Seeing the Invisible; and Marcelin Pleynet, "Musical Drawing and Graphic 
Drawing  in  the  Work  of  August  von  Briesen,"  trans.  Stephen  Bann,  in  Laurent Michel, ed., Briesen: L'o#rande musicale (Geneva: Muse'e de l'Athe'ne'e, "#%").
  26. Laruelle, Re'9exions philosophiques sur l'oeuvre d'August von Briesen, "+0.  27. Ibid., "+$.
  28. Although  his pencil  drawings seem to have garnered the most attention,  at  least  from  Henry  and  Laruelle,  von  Briesen  did  not  work  exclusively  in  that 
medium. He worked commercially as an illustrator, designing the covers of books, and he was a moderately successful painter as well, painting a number of landscapes and interiors. In addition to the small pencil drawings of music, his images of music were also reproduced in large form: ""#%0 was designated the European 
Year of Music by the Council of Europe, and for this occasion August von Briesen created  two  /,  by  /,  foot  ["-  *  "-  m]  color  paintings  of  Mozart's  opera  `Don 
Giovanni,' one each for the first and second acts. Six other color paintings were done in the same format for Brahms' Symphony number /. Two canvasses at the 
same  size,  this  time  in  black  and  white,  depicted  Bach's  Goldberg  Variations" (ibid).
  29. Henry, "Graphie de la subjectivite'," .-.  30. Ibid.
  31. Ibid., .%, /-, emphasis added.  32. Franc,ois Laruelle, "Re'(exions philosophiques sur l'oeuvre d'August von Briesen," in Laruelle, Re'9exions philosophiques sur l'oeuvre d'August von Briesen, "/.  33. Ibid., "$. Music must have had an almost synesthetic power over von Briesen. "Barthes said, `there must be something wrong with me, I see language.' Von Briesen could easily say, `there must be something wrong with me, I draw music. . . . 
As a listener I don't hear the music so much as see it, but as an artist, I don't see music, I listen at the very depths of drawing'" (ibid., -,).
  34. Henry, "Graphie de la subjectivite'," 0/, emphasis removed.  35. Pleynet, "Musical  Drawing and Graphic Drawing in the  Work of August 
von Briesen," #$, #,. "The drawing o)ers us a sensory image not the image of a melodic line but that of a sonorous space which has already been established" (#$).
  36. Laruelle, "Re'(exions philosophiques sur l'oeuvre d'August von Briesen," "$. In his essay on the transcendental computer, Laruelle makes a distinction between 
the automaton and what he calls the "unimaton." Making a play on words with the pre!xes auto-  and uni- , Laruelle seeks to highlight the auto- relational nature of 

    254 26/08/2014   5:06:24 PM

  Notes to Chapter M  !55
philosophy and the uni- relational nature of non- standard philosophy. See Laru-elle, "L'ordinateur transcendantal, 0- "#.
  37. Laruelle  makes  a  number  of  references  to  "black  boxes,"  "black  music boxes," and even a musical camera obscura, Latin for "dark chamber." "Von Briesen 
likes to work `in the dark,'" by sitting in the orchestra pit rather than with the audi-ence, "because he knows that in the pit he is positioned just at the point where he 
can, despite  everything,  manifest as  a  whole  and  without remainder the musical real" (Laruelle, "Re'(exions philosophiques sur l'oeuvre d'August von Briesen," "/).
  38. Franc,ois Laruelle, "La plus haute des contemplations," in Re'9exions philo-sophiques sur l'oeuvre d'August von Briesen, "0/.
  39. Laruelle, "Re'(exions philosophiques sur l'oeuvre d'August von Briesen," "$.  40. Ibid., "-.
  41. Ibid., "-, "/. At times Laruelle adopts an almost Deleuzian vocabulary and describes the way in which "philosophers like Bergson, Merleau- Ponty, and Nietzsche have described this world of (ows, of vibrations and rhythms, of condensa-tions and dissipations, of variations in intensity that come before the perceptual 
and pictorial order" (Laruelle, "La plus haute des contemplations," "0,). Von Bri-esen's style is not simply that of a "romantic interiority" or a "musical nostalgia," 
but rather a more remote and "splendid world of multiplicities" (ibid., "$/).  42. Laruelle  refuses  to  contextualize  von  Briesen  within  the  tradition  of  the 
avant- garde, modernist or otherwise. "Rather than calling [von Briesen's work] a kind of musico- graphical `happening' or action- drawing, which would still only be 
a super!cial interpretation of the work . . . we might rather label it a kind of free- 9oating  graphicality  (just  as  psychoanalysts  speak  of  a  `free- (oating  attention')" 

(ibid., "0%).  43. For an author who is keen to suppress or obfuscate his own philosophical 
lineage, particularly so after the earliest phases of his career, Laruelle's writings on von Briesen over(ow with a profoundly Nietzschean sensibility: "Von Briesen is 
animated by an almost excessive will- to- draw [vouloir- dessiner]. He expresses him-self through a permanent struggle with the music . . . . A willful drawing, but even 
more than willful, the drawing of the will, the will- to- draw directly within present conditions, the gesture burns within the moment" (Laruelle, "Re'(exions philosophiques sur l'oeuvre d'August von Briesen," "$, "%). The Nietzschean in(uence is perhaps not surprising given Laruelle's early book on Nietzsche (Nietzsche contra 
Heidegger:  The`ses  pour  une  politique  nietzsche'enne  [Paris:  Payot,  "#++])  and  the role  that  Nietzsche  plays  in  Les  philosophies  de  la  di#e'rence  (Paris:  PUF,  "#%$). 
Laruelle's writings on von Briesen come near the start of the period of what Laru-elle has labeled "Philosophy II" ("#%"- #0), the phase of his writings that marks the 
beginning of non- philosophy proper. The Nietzsche book was published in "#++ and marks the end of "Philosophy I," the first period of his work, which he admitted several years later was still "placed under the authority of the Principle of Suf-!cient Philosophy" (Laruelle, Principes de la non- philosophie, .#).

As for the topic of Nietzsche and music, "we know that Nietzsche composed music, which at any rate was likely not that good, but what would a `Nietzschean' 

    255 26/08/2014   5:06:24 PM

!56  Notes to Chapter M
music be if it existed? . . . Music becomes Nietzschean with von Briesen, or at the very least it ceases to be reactive, ceases to be a mere `appendage' relying on the 
canvas  and  its  graphical  methods  in  order  to  `come  to  the  surface'"  (Laruelle, "Re'(exions philosophiques sur l'oeuvre d'August von Briesen," "-).

Henry  makes  the  connection  explicit  as  well,  linking  von Briesen  with  both Schopenhauer and Nietzsche: "Schopenhauer is, along with Nietzsche, one of the 
rare  philosophers  with  whom  von  Briesen  felt  a  profound  a*nity"  (Henry, "Graphie de la subjectivite'," -%). Or by von Briesen's own admission: "As a child I 
was fragile and weak, beaten down and humiliated. But now I have become strong. I  possess  a  terrible  force.  For  instance  I  would  kill  anyone  if  they  so  much  as 
touched my children. . . . I was already Nietzschean before I even read Nietzsche for the first time" (ibid., .%).
  44. Ibid., .$.  45. Ibid., ./.
  46. Hal  Foster  concisely  summarizes  the  present  conjuncture  in  his  article "Post- Critical" published in October ".# (Winter -,"-): .- %.
  47. For more on theories of aesthetic immanence in the French tradition, see Mikel Dufrenne, The Phenomenology of Aesthetic Experience ["#0.], trans. Edward 
Casey et al. (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, "#+.); E'tienne Souriau, "A General Methodology for the scientific Study of Aesthetic Appreciation," trans. 
Van Meter Ames, Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism "/, no. " (September "#00): "- "%; and Ge'rard Genette, The Work of Art: Immanence and Transcendence, trans. 
G. M. Goshgarian (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, "##+). It is known that Deleuze's explorations into the immanent aesthetics of cinema were at least partially in(uenced by Dufrenne (see Deleuze, Cinema $, -." n. "$). And Genette him-self cites Souriau on the "plurality of modes of existence" ("-). Although Genette 
devotes considerable attention to the topic of aesthetic immanence in his book, the concept comes across quite di)erently from that of Laruelle. For Genette, immanence is essentially a way of describing the specific !xed materiality of a work of art, and is thus a synonym for "material objects" (.") or "unique objects of immanence" (.-). "Autographic objects of immanence, which consist in physical things or events, fall, naturally, within the province of the senses, lending themselves to 
direct perception through sight, hearing, touch, taste, smell, or a combination of two or more of the senses" (-#). Genette borrows the term autographic (and its 
companion, allographic) from Nelson Goodman, Languages of Art: An Approach to a Theory of Symbols (Indianapolis: Hackett, "#+$).
  48. Philosophical realism concerns whether or not reality exists independently of the observer, and realism carries its own meaning in law, international relations, 
and  several  other  !elds.  In  the  arts,  realism  bears  a  profusion  of  di)erent  and sometimes  divergent  meanings.  Realism  in  literature  and  !ne  art  refers  to  the 
depictions of the conditions of everyday life that emerged in nineteenth- century France particularly after "%/% with Courbet and others, or in literature with Balzac 
or  Flaubert.  Social  realism,  as  in  Walker  Evans's  photographs  of  the  American 

    256 26/08/2014   5:06:24 PM

  Notes to Chapter M  !57
Great Depression, extends and modulates these concerns by focusing on the condi-tions of the disenfranchised. In a di)erent sense, the socialist realism of socialist and 
communist countries orients itself around the revolutionary or post- revolutionary subject, as in Gladkov's novel Cement ("#-0) depicting post- revolutionary Russia 
or the Stalinist architecture of the Palace of Culture and Science in Warsaw. Fur-ther, the post- World War II !lms of Visconti, Rossellini, de Sica, and others represent  a  slightly  di)erent  approach  to  realism. Known  as  Italian  neorealism,  such !lms were notable for shooting on location, using inexpensive cameras and sound 
equipment,  casting  nonprofessional  actors,  and  focusing  on  poverty  and  other proletarian themes. For some deeper  reflection on these many issues, see in particular T. J. Clark, The Painting of Modern Life: Paris in the Art of Manet and His Followers (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, "###), and the chapter "The 
Existence of Italy" in Fredric Jameson, Signatures of the Visible (New York: Rout-ledge,  "##-),  "00- --#.  John  Mullarkey  has  also  explicitly  described  the  relation 
between Laruelle and Italian neorealism in his essay "The Tragedy of the Object: Democracy of Vision and the Terrorism of Things in Bazin's Cinematic Realism," 
Angelaki "+, no. / (-,"-): .#- 0#.  49. Although there is not enough room in the present volume to grant Henry 
the necessary attention that he deserves, su*ce it to say that Henry represents a very di)erent kind of immanence, and indeed a very di)erent kind of phenomenology. Like other phenomenologists, a central concept for him is revelation. Yet Henry does not seek a revelation of the world. Instead, like Laruelle, Henry seeks 
an "immanent revelation" interior to the human self, because, as he puts it, the truth of  man is "more original  than the truth of  Being"  (Henry,  The  Essence of 
Manifestation, /"). Thus Henry displays not so much an immanence of matter, but an immanence of life, spirit, or Ego. "To want `to bring to light' the foundation is 
the ultimate ontological absurdity," Henry claims, rebu*ng Heidegger and other likeminded phenomenologists. "The universal light is not the homeland of all phenomena. The `invisible' is the mode of a positive and truly fundamental revelation" (ibid., /-, //). Henry's term for this is a#ect; Schopenhauer, a great in(uence on 
Henry, calls it will.Art is never art of what is seen, only what is unseen. As Henry says of both 
Kandinsky and von Briesen, to paint is to paint the invisible because what is ren-dered is always an a)ect, a will, an internality, an immanence, a life: "The content 

of painting, of all paintings, is the Internal, the invisible life that does not cease to be invisible and remains forever in the Dark. . . . To paint is to show, but this showing has the aim of letting us see what is not seen and cannot be seen. The means of painting . . . sink into the Night of this abyssal subjectivity that no ray of light can 
enter and that no dawn will ever dissipate" (Henry, Seeing the Invisible, ",).Henry's commitment to abstraction is formidable in the Kandinsky book. He 
maintains that even the material support of painting, not just its compositional content,  is  abstract.  Even  the  points  and  lines  on  the  canvas  are  pure  abstrac- 
tions. "The means by which [painting] expresses this invisible content-- forms and 

    257 26/08/2014   5:06:24 PM

!58  Notes to Chapter M
colours-- are themselves invisible" (ibid., #). Ultimately he agrees with Laruelle on the question of utopia and the withdrawal from the world: "`Abstract' no longer 
refers to what is derived from the world at the end of a process of simpli!cation or complication or at the end of the history of modern painting: instead, it refers to 
what was prior to the world and does not need the world in order to exist. It refers to the life that is embraced in the night of its radical subjectivity, where there is no 
light or world" (ibid., "$).  50. Deleuze has been the most in(uential of all the late twentieth- century theorists  of  immanent  or  realist  aesthetics,  inspiring  a  new  generation  of  writers focused on the direct, material, and real conditions of art. See, in particular: Brian 
Massumi's two books, Parables for the Virtual: Movement, A#ect, Sensation (Dur-ham, N.C.: Duke University Press, -,,-) and Semblance and Event: Activist Philosophy  and  the  Occurent  Arts  (Cambridge,  Mass.:  MIT  Press,  -,"");  Elizabeth Grosz,  Chaos,  Territory,  Art:  Deleuze  and  the  Framing  of  the  Earth  (New  York: 
Columbia  University  Press,  -,,%);  and  Steven  Shaviro,  Without  Criteria:  Kant, Whitehead, Deleuze, and Aesthetics (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, -,,#). A lesser- 
known text, parallel to Deleuze and cited by him, is Bernard Cache's "#%. book on geography, architecture, and topological theory titled Earth Moves: The Furnishing 
of Territories, trans. Anne Boyman (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, "##0).  51. See Martin Heidegger, Poetry, Language, Thought, trans. Albert Hofstadter 
(New York: HarperCollins, "#+").  52. Deleuze's aesthetics centralizes the role of production and desire while minimizing or eliminating representational and metaphysical structures. A number of contemporary thinkers have explored the centrality of production and creativity 
in philosophy, whether aesthetic or  more  strictly ontological. See, in particular, Iain Hamilton Grant, Philosophies of Nature after Schelling (London: Continuum, 
-,,$)  and  Steven  Shaviro,  Without  Criteria,  in  which,  in  an  unorthodox  read- ing, Shaviro suggests that Kant's aesthetics was itself already immanent or nonrepresentational.  A  more  classical  text,  Meyer  Abrams,  The  Mirror  and  the  Lamp: Romantic  Theory  and  the  Critical  Tradition  (Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press, 
"#0.), examines a broad range of aesthetic theories within romanticism, including  reflective and expressive models. More recently the architect Lars Spuybroek, in 
his The Sympathy of Things: Ruskin and the Ecology of Design (Rotterdam: NAi, -,"-), has made an impassioned plea for a return to John Ruskin as a way to grapple with the reality of objects in an age of technological mediation.  53. Laruelle, "La plus haute des contemplations," "0/, "0%.
  54. Deleuze, Di#erence and Repetition, xx. In fact the opening of Di#erence and Repetition has a bit of a non- philosophical tinge: di)erence "in itself " (-%).
  55. Laruelle, "La plus haute des contemplations," "+,, emphasis removed.  56. Ibid.
  57. Ibid., "$,.  58. Laruelle, "Re'(exions philosophiques sur l'oeuvre d'August von Briesen," "%. 
"The art work, von Briesen himself, and we the viewers together make a circle, a circle of self contemplation combining both extreme passivity and extreme activity, 

    258 26/08/2014   5:06:24 PM

  Notes to Chapter N  !59
the  circle  of  the  `eternal  return.'  It  is  the  ful!llment,  at  and  the  same  time  the destruction, of the old notion of the `correspondence of the arts'" (Laruelle, "La 
plus haute des contemplations," "$,).  59. Ibid., "$$.
  60. Ibid., "$-.  61. Laruelle, "Re'(exions philosophiques sur l'oeuvre d'August von Briesen," ",.
  62. Ibid.  63. Laruelle, "La plus haute des contemplations," "$/.
  64. Ibid., "+,. Indeed Laruelle's non- standard aesthetics is driven largely by a withdrawal from and unilateralization of the basic terms put forth in Kant's Critique of Judgement, including questions of taste,  reflection, aesthetic judgment, and the constitution of the aesthetic regime. See, in particular, Franc,ois Laruelle, "Le 
proble`me  d'une  pense'e- art  ou  d'une  non- esthe'tique"  (typescript,  undated),  and Franc,ois Laruelle, "Qui est artiste?" (typescript, undated).
  65. The work of von Briesen "isn't nihilist in its destruction of the musical and graphical fetish, so much as ascetic and a*rmative" (Laruelle, "Re'(exions philosophiques sur l'oeuvre d'August von Briesen," -,).  66. Laruelle, "La plus haute des contemplations," "+,.
  67. Ibid. See also the discussion of the common in Henry, "Graphie de la sub-jectivite'," -0- $,.
  68. Laruelle, "Re'(exions philosophiques sur l'oeuvre d'August von Briesen," "%.  69. Here I side with Ray Brassier, who views Laruelle's chief innovation as that of 
developing a nondialectical, post- Hegelian logic of relation. See chapter 0 of Brass-ier, Nihil Unbound, ""%- /#. As Brassier puts it, Laruelle's innovation is "fundamentally  formal:  it  consists  in  the  invention  of  a  new  kind  of  transcendental  logic whose conceptual depth (if not extensive breadth) at once equals and challenges 
that of Hegel's dialectical logic" ("/%). Although, while Brassier characterizes Laru-elle's logic primarily in terms of negation, I !nd it more apt to characterize the 
non- standard logic in terms of identity (a = a or the One- in- One).  70. Fredric Jameson, "In Soviet Arcadia," New Left Review +0 (May- June -,"-): 
""#- -+, "-0.  71. Ibid.

# .   E D I H B K
  1. See Franc,ois Laruelle, The'orie ge'ne'rale des victimes (Paris: Mille et une nuits, -,"-), subsequent parenthetical citations refer to this edition.

  2. The heart of the book, occupying approximately one- quarter its length, is the  opening  chapter  on "The  Victim- in- Person."  This is followed by a  series  of 
shorter chapters that expound on additional themes: the role of the intellectual, the "weak force" of the victim, crime and punishment, animals and animality, victims' resurrection and insurrection, and ultimately Laruelle's thoughts on some of the most signi!cant  historical instances of  victimization such as the Holocaust, 
Christ's cruci!cation, and crimes against humanity. These more topical chapters are bookended by  two thin sections at  the  start  and  !nish  of  the  book. First  is  

    259 26/08/2014   5:06:24 PM

!6;  Notes to Chapter N
an opening section, "Some Theoretical Preparations and Precautions" (Laruelle, The'orie ge'ne'rale des victimes, ",- -,), which "!xes the coordinates of the book in a 
slightly more rigorous way, its vocabulary and its method" (#) using the techniques of  non- standard  philosophy.  As  we  have  seen,  Laruelle's  project  is  notoriously 
idiosyncratic, often entirely unassimilable to any philosophical precedent. For the most part, the non- standard jargon and methods that tend to saturate his books 
are signi!cantly toned down in the body of this text. However, here in the opening pages, Laruelle dips into a more technical idiom. Likewise, a closing section, "Recollection of  the  Entire  Argument"  ("#$- -",),  does not  so  much  summarize  the book as  restate  and elaborate  some  of  its  claims using,  again,  the  slightly  more 
rigorous terminology and phrasing of Laruelle's non- standard philosophy.  3. Victims are thus never "saved." We should cease to speak of things like survivors  or  casualties.  Victims  are,  in  Laruelle's  words,  resurrected.  That  is,  they  participate  in  a  unidirectional  and  inaugural  human  event.  "Victims  alone . . . 
deserve  resurrection,  and  likely  they  alone  have  the  power  to  do  it"  (Laruelle, The'orie ge'ne'rale des victimes, .., emphasis removed). But here Laruelle risks being 
misunderstood because of his choice of words. He is drawn to the term resurrec-tion not for its religious connotations so much as the powerful logic it describes. 
Just as his claim "We are all victims" has nothing to do with the doctrine of origi- nal sin, and just as his call for compassion has nothing to do with the tradition  
of humanist charity (with its adjacent ills of self- righteousness or priggish patron-ization), resurrection has nothing to do with the miracle of Christian rebirth. Or  
if  it  does,  at  least  Laruelle  is  attempting  to  perform  a  powerful  heresy  against  those sources, refashioning their logics into a parallel, non- standard form. "Neither natural phenomenon nor religious miracle, generic resurrection is materiel rather than material, vectorial rather than spiritual. It means a new insurrection 
each time, in each relaunching or superposition, of immanent lived reality, passing over and bringing down the most excessive moments of monotheistic transcendence" ("00).  4. Alain Badiou, Logics of Worlds, /.
  5. For Laruelle, there are not Badiousian truths so much as "the algebraic objec-tivity of human lived experience" (Laruelle, The'orie ge'ne'rale des victimes, 0.). Real 
human experience is thus not so much a fact but a variable, not so much an object but a formal relation, just as the algebraic equation x = 5y tells how x and y are 
related without saying anything about what x and y actually are. (Indeed, here on these pages, Laruelle's concept of superposition closely resembles Deleuze's concept of the virtual.) Such an outcome is appealing to Laruelle because it eschews the  need  for  dialectical  synthesis.  Instead  entities  withdraw  into  a  condition  of 
"duality"  or  "fusion."  Thus  in  opposition  to  Badiou's  "dialectical  materialism," Laruelle proposes what he calls a "materialized algebra" of elements held as variables in superposition with each other.  6. The various permutations of the subject are complex in Laruelle. His main 
goal  is  to  clone  and  unilateralize  the  transcendental  subject.  First  o),  Laruelle  does not begin from the one. Instead he begins from philosophy, from, say, the 

    260 26/08/2014   5:06:24 PM

  Notes to Chapter N  !6:
philosophical notion of the Ego. From the outset, the Ego may remain in a fully immanent state, what Laruelle calls the Ego- in- Ego. Or the Ego can also split into 
historically and philosophically specific conditions, the modern Ego, for example, as seen in the Cartesian contract between thought and being (cogito ergo sum). In 
this sense, the "transcendental dialectic" or "amphibology" between Ego and sub-ject takes on a specific, regional pro!le, which is to say a certain type of subject 
grounded in the pact between thought and being. "The principle of `Modernity,' of `Spirit,' is the amphibious quality of the Ego and the subject, their reduction one to 
the other," writes Laruelle. "This subject is the synthesis-- but more or less imme-diate or mediatised then di)erentiated-- of Being and thought" (Laruelle, Principes 
de la non- philosophie, ##). There are four terms at play: Ego and subject, but also thought and Being. When the Ego takes the form of the Cartesian subject, that 
subject consists of a riven core in which thought and Being are interrelated and "amphibiously"  intermixed.  Laruelle  is  o)ended  by  the  local  amphibology  of 
thought  and  Being  within  the  Cartesian  subject,  but  he  is  also  o)ended by  the larger amphibology of subject and Ego. What Laruelle seeks is a theory of the subject rooted in an immanent Ego (the Ego- in- Ego). In other words, the antinomy itself does not ground anything at all; its very auto- positionality-- I am a subject  

in relation to the transcendental Ego, and the transcendental Ego manifests itself in individual subjects like me-- is evidence of its vain and bloated self- suficientcy. 
The antinomy itself must be explained. And in this sense, the Ego- subject antin-omy is the philosophical fodder that allows non- philosophy to begin its work. As 
Laruelle says, "We must explain theoretically why the philosophies of the Ego and the subject are enmeshed" (ibid., #+).

Thus Laruelle does not begin from the one. He begins from philosophy, in this case  with  the  Ego- subject  relation  in  Descartes.  Then,  second,  by  virtue  of  the 
force (of) thought he asserts axiomatically the identity of both Ego and subject (something like E = s). This constitutes the first movement into non- philosophy 
proper.  It  asserts  the  transcendental  identity  that  is  "before"  or  "more  generic" than both Ego and subject. "A theory of the subject is only possible on the basis of 
an invalidation of the confusion of the Ego with the subject or with the structure of the Philosophical Decision: the Ego is no longer subject but rather Real, and the 
subject is `emptied' too of its mixtures with the Ego (but not of the Ego itself)" (ibid., ##). Asserting the identity of Ego and subject (E = s) is what invalidates the 
confusion. Only by virtue of Cartesianism being so auto- re(exive-- the self as it orients back on the self-- can Cartesianism indicate to Laruelle the way forward 
toward a generic identity  of the Ego. In other words the  very  narcissism of the Cartesian  subject  becomes  the  raw  ingredients  for  immanence  within  the  non- 
philosophical Ego. And !nally, according to the principle of unilateral duality, he aprioristically converts the identity into a duality (i.e., converts E = s into E- s). 
This !nally describes non- philosophy proper. In fact during the process the one never really enters in. It only appears "in the last instance," because at the end there 
arrives a condition of the generic real.

    261 26/08/2014   5:06:24 PM

!6!  Notes to Chapter N
  7. Laruelle's use of Christ and resurrection comes to a climax in the book's provocative ending section, where he talks directly about specific instances of victimization,  first  with  the  Holocaust,  then  again  with  Christ's  cruci!cation,  and ultimately  with  crimes  against  humanity.  Yet  Laruelle  does  not  address  human 
rights,  genocide,  crimes  against  humanity,  the  Holocaust,  or  other  matters  of world- historical importance in any sustained way. This is not a book about political events and the waves of violence and trauma they produce. For better or worse he remains stubborn on the question of theory: Laruelle's non- standard philosophy can and must move forward using theory and theory alone. Analyses of events such as the Shoah or the cruci!xion of Jesus are only useful for him to the extent 
that they can be rejiggered as theoretical constructs. So although this book per-haps veers closer to the newspaper headlines than past Laruelle projects, it is still 
properly labeled a "general theory" of victims, not a tally sheet of the dead or a manifesto for breaking the bonds of subjugation.
  8. See Badiou, Logics of Worlds, .#+- //+.  9. Ibid., /-,.
  10. The  friend/foe  distinction  is  closely  associated  with  the  work  of  Carl Schmitt. See, in particular, Carl Schmitt, The Concept of the Political, trans. George 
Schwab (New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, "#+$).  11. Louis Althusser, Lenin and Philosophy, ".. Ironically the word science derives 
etymologically from a root meaning to cut or divide.  12. Guy Debord, The Society of the Spectacle, trans. Donald Nicholson- Smith 
(New York: Zone Books, "##/), /".  13. Heidegger, Being and Time, 0".
  14. Tiqqun, Introduction to Civil War, trans. Alexander R. Galloway and Jason E. Smith (Los Angeles: Semiotext[e], -,",), -,$.
  15. Ibid., -"/.  16. Heidegger, Being and Time, "0,.
  17. Ibid., "/#.  18. Ibid., "$+.
  19. Brassier's critique of Laruelle hinges on precisely this point, that Laruelle privileges his own special "suspending instance" in the form of radical immanence. 
See Brassier, Nihil Unbound, "--.  20. Laruelle says something similar in the opening pages of Philosophies of Difference: "The canonical enunciation: Everything is (Water, Earth, Fire, etc.). . . the Milesian  enunciation,  itself,  makes  apparent  the  oldest  concrete  philosophical 
matrix, a matrix of the empirico- transcendental parallelism and/or circle . . . the empirico- transcendental  Circle  that  is the  essence  not  only  of  metaphysics,  but  
of the attempts to `surpass,' `overcome,' `turn' or `deconstruct' metaphysics as well and that altogether surpasses, as circle, any attempts to distend it, split it, break it, 
etc. . . . It is to think the real as all (the all: not only the universal, but an absolute or unifying universal) and thus, inversely, the all of the real as still an element of 
the  real,  indeed  as  Other"  (Laruelle,  Philosophies  of  Di#erence,  $).  To  be  clear, Laruelle is not against a uni!ed theory; his opposition is to any kind of "absolute" 

    262 26/08/2014   5:06:25 PM

  Notes to Chapter FO  !63
or "unifying" tendency that would make the All a transcendental suficientcy sub-stitutable for all reality, thereby isolating and incorporating alterity within itself. 
By contrast the Laruellean one is insufficient or generic in its universality.
" , .   TI ?   G ? C ? ? H B
  1. "Science and philosophy meet in the universality of the synthetic a priori," writes  Laruelle,  giving  credit  to  Kant's  centrality  in  modern  philosophical  discourse. "As an example of a non- philosophical undertaking, we focus directly on the problem of the a priori. We take the `synthetic a priori judgment,' which Kant 
revealed  to  be  the  basic  essence  and  algorithm  of  philosophy  in  the  form  of  a hybrid between metaphysics and science, and treat it as our material." See Laruelle, 
Principes de la non- philosophie, .-", ."/.  2. See,  for  example,  the  sections  on  the  singular  and  the  generic  in  Badiou, 
Being and Event, or the chapter titled "Whatever" in Giorgio Agamben, The Com-ing  Community,  trans.  Michael  Hardt  (Minneapolis:  University  of  Minnesota 
Press, "##.), "- -. Although he is not a "subtractivist" per se, Laruelle can, in a very general sense, be included in this tradition to the extent that he endorses a generic 
state of immanence, whether it be the real as One- in- One or humanity as Stranger or Man- in- person [Homme- en- personne]. See, for example, Laruelle, Introduction 
aux sciences ge'ne'riques. On the term "Man- in- person," see also Franc,ois Laruelle, Future Christ: A Lesson in Heresy, trans. Anthony Paul Smith (London: Continuum, -,",), -, 0, -,, and passim, and Franc,ois Laruelle, L'ultime honneur des intel-lectuels (Paris: Les e'ditions Textuel, -,,.), -$, 0,, and passim.
  3. Hardt and Negri, Empire, -"-.  4. Hardt and Negri, Commonwealth, "0-.
  5. Peter Hallward, Badiou: A Subject to Truth (Minneapolis: University of Min-nesota Press, -,,.), "$..
  6. Badiou, Manifesto for Philosophy, "/.. For more on Badiou's theory of sub-traction see Alain Badiou, "On Subtraction," in Conditions, trans. Steven Corcoran 
(London: Continuum, -,,%), "".- -%. See also Badiou, Being and Event, particu-larly Part VII on the generic.
  7. Michel Foucault, "Of Other Spaces," trans. Jay Miskowiec, diacritics "$, no. " (Spring "#%$): --- -+.
  8. See Marc Auge', Non- places: Introduction to an Anthropology of Supermoder-nity, trans. John Howe (London and New York: Verso, "##0). Auge' laments a new 
kind of world that anthropologists must acknowledge and make sense of: "[a] world where people are born in the clinic and die in hospital, where transit points and 
temporary abodes are proliferating under luxurious or inhuman conditions (hotel chains and squats, holiday clubs and refugee camps, shantytowns threatened with 
demolition or doomed to festering longevity); where a dense network of means of transport  which  are  also  inhabited  spaces  is  developing;  where  the  habitue'  of 
supermarkets, slot machines and credit cards communicates wordlessly, through gestures,  with  an  abstract,  unmediated commerce;  a  world  thus  surrendered  to 
solitary individuality, to the (eeting, the temporary and ephemeral" (+%).

    263 26/08/2014   5:06:25 PM

!64  Notes to Chapter FO
  9. See  chapter  +  in  Deleuze,  Cinema  $.  Deleuze's  any- space- whatever  and Auge''s non- place are sometimes confused by English readers, because of a mistake 
in  Deleuze's  English  translation  attributing  the  term  "any- space- whatever"  to  a certain Pascal Auge'. The attribution should read Pascal Auger, the French experimental !lmmaker and former student of Deleuze.  10. Deleuze, Cinema $, ""-.
  11. Like Heidegger's use of the phrase "It gives" (es gibt), Levinas uses the neu-tral expression "There is" (il y a) as a way to reference the "phenomenon of impersonal being" (Emmanuel Levinas, Ethics and In!nity: Conversations with Philippe Nemo, trans. Richard Cohen [Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press, "#%0], /%). 
Levinas also explores the conditions of impersonal selfhood and otherness by way of the latinate terms "ipseity," meaning itselfness, selfhood, or that- one- hood, and 
"Illeity," a strange coinage literally meaning He- hood that Levinas uses to refer to the remote absent trace of God. "The ipseity of the I consists in remaining outside 
the distinction between the individual and the general. . . . The I is thus the mode in  which  the  break- up  of  totality, which  leads to  the  presence  of  the  absolutely 
other, is concretely accomplished. It is solitude par excellence" (Emmanuel Levi-nas, Totality and In!nity: An Essay on Exteriority, trans. Alphonso Lingis [Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press, "#$#], ""%). For more on Illeity see Emmanuel Levinas, Otherwise than Being: Or Beyond Essence, trans. Alphonso Lingis (Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press, "##%), "$-.  12. Jean- Franc,ois Lyotard, The Inhuman: Re9ections on Time, trans. Geo)rey 

Bennington and Rachel Bowlby (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, "##").  13. Ibid., "%+, +.
  14. Deleuze, The Logic of Sense, 0-, emphasis removed.  15. Ibid., ",-.
  16. Deleuze and Laruelle both pro!t from subtleties in the French term per-sonne that can mean both "person" and "no one" (elle n'est personne [Deleuze, The 
Logic of Sense, ""$]). Thus the "person" in Deleuze is actually an impersonal being, or perhaps more simply an "imperson." Contrast this also to the Deleuzian concept of the "dividual."  17. See, for example, Laruelle, Future Christ.
  18. Heidegger, Identity and Di#erence, $$.  19. See,  for  example,  Alphonso  Lingis,  The  Community  of  Those  Who  Have 
Nothing in Common (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, "##/), and Jacques Rancie`re,  Disagreement:  Politics  and  Philosophy,  trans.  Julie  Rose  (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, "###).  20. See, for instance, the account given in Marcelo Bucheli, Bananas and Business:  The  United  Fruit Company  in  Colombia,  $EBB- 5@@@ (New  York:  New  York University Press, -,,0).
  21. "What  does  it  mean  to  force  philosophical  properties  into  their  generic states?"  Laruelle  asks  near  the  beginning  of  Philosophie  non- standard,  "-+.  The 
forcing of a passage from the transcendental to the immanent entails !ve steps:  (") specify whatever is transcendental in any given philosophical work, (-) de!ne 

    264 26/08/2014   5:06:25 PM

  Notes to Chapter FO  !65
the  particular  attributes  in  which  the  transcendental  operates,  in  particular  the internal hierarchy they produce, (.) render such attributes insufficient by under- 
determining  them,  (/)  fuse  the  hierarchical  attributes  under  the  condition  of immanence, and (0) extrapolate back to the real appearance or symptom (Laruelle, 
Philosophie non- standard, "-%- -#).  22. Alain  Badiou,  "On  the  Truth  Process,"  http://www.egs.edu/faculty/alain 
- badiou/articles/on- the- truth- process/. For a more technical de!nition of forcing see Badiou, Being and Event, particularly Parts VII and VIII (.-+- /.0).
  23. David Graeber makes such an argument rather convincingly in his Debt: The First 6@@@ Years (Brooklyn: Melville House, -,""). See in particular the discussion of "everyday communism" (#/- ",-).  24. Jo Freeman, "The Tyranny of Structurelessness," http://www.jofreeman.com 
/joreen/tyranny.htm.  25. Eugene Thacker and I have written more about this in our book The Exploit: 
A Theory of Networks (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, -,,+).

    265 26/08/2014   5:06:25 PM